JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 ACT Government and Parks and Conservation Services logoBox-gum woodland in the Justice Robert Hope Park.
b JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 PROJECT NAME Justice Robert Hope Park Offset Management Plan for Block 9 Section 64 Watson Residential Development and Negus Crescent Extension, ACT. EPBC REFERRAL NUMBER EPBC 2012/6418 LOCATION OF THE ACTION Watson Block 7, Section 72, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The Parks and Conservation Service would like to acknowledge the contribution of all stakeholders who have commented on aspects of this plan, including the Watson Woodlands Working Group (John Briggs and Richard Larson specifically). We would also like to acknowledge the contribution of Lori Gould and Maya Potapowicz, who assisted in developing the plan. © AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY, CANBERRA 2019 This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, no part may be reproduced by any process without written permission from: Director-General, Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government, GPO Box 158, Canberra ACT 2601. Phone: 02 6207 1923 Website: www.environment.act.gov.au ACCESSIBILITY The ACT Government is committed to making its information, services, events and venues as accessible as possible. If you have difficulty reading a standard printed document and would like to receive this publication in an alternative format, such as large print, please phone Access Canberra on 13 22 81 or email the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate at epsddcomms@act.gov.au If English is not your first language and you require a translating and interpreting service, please phone 13 14 50. If you are deaf, or have a speech or hearing impairment, and need the teletypewriter service, please phone 13 36 77 and ask for Access Canberra on 13 22 81. For speak and listen users, please phone 1300 555 727 and ask for Access Canberra on 13 22 81. For more information on these services visit www.relayservice.com.au.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 i CONTENT List of abbreviations ii List of Tables ii List of Figures ii 1. Introduction................................................1 1.1 Background 1 1.2 Purpose and scope 2 1.3 Strategic context 2 1.4 Specific commitments 4 1.5 Roles and responsibilities 6 1.6 Statutory bodies and community consultation 7 1.7 Process for Incorporating the offset site into Canberra Nature Park 8 1.8 Funding arrangements 8 2. Offset Site Description...................................9 2.1 Connectivity 9 2.2 Conservation significance 12 2.3 Land-use history 12 2.4 Significant communities 14 2.5 Significant species 14 2.6 Cultural heritage values 15 2.7 Recreational values 15 2.8 Community involvement 15 2.9 Other 16 3. Conservation Values.................................... 17 3.1 White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland 17 3.2 Hoary Sunray 19 3.3 Regent Honeyeater 21 3.4 Superb Parrot 22 3.5 Swift Parrot 25 3.6 Other conservation assets 26 4.  Habitat Improvement Plan. .......................... 27 4.1 Over-abundant or invasive plants, animals and pathogens 27 4.2 Enhancement 29 4.3 Assets and Infrastructure 32 4.4 Community Engagement 33 4.5 Managing Cultural Heritage Values 33 5. Monitoring Plan . ......................................... 35 5.1 Monitoring MNES 35 5.2 Monitoring other conservation values 38 5.3 Monitoring invasive plants 38 5.4 Photo monitoring points 38 5.5 Water quality and frog monitoring 40 5.6 Performance measures, benchmarks and completion criteria 40 5.7 Limitations and uncertainties 43 6. Management Action Plan............................. 45 6.1 Planning 45 6.2 Capital improvement works 46 6.3 Environmental enhancement and operational works 47 6.4 Monitoring program and review 48 6.5 Management resources 49 7. Adaptive Management................................. 51 8 Record Management ................................... 52 9 Reporting................................................... 52 9.1 Standard reporting schedule 52 9.2 Reporting of unanticipated or unapproved incidents 52 10. Review. ..................................................... 52 References..................................................... 53 Appendices. .................................................... 57 Appendix A. Flora species list in offset site. 57 Appendix B. Fauna species list for offset site and adjacent areas 61.
ii JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 List of abbreviations ACT Australian Capital Territory COG Canberra Ornithologist Group CR  Conservation and Research unit - within the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate EPBC Act Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwth) EPSDD Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate LDA Land Development Agency (now Suburban Land Agency) MNES Matters of National Environmental Significance NC Act Nature Conservation Act 1980 (ACT) NSW New South Wales OMP Offset Management Plan PCS  ACT Parks and Conservation Service - within the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate WWWG Watson Woodlands Working Group List of Tables Table 1. Links with regional and national strategies and recovery plans Table 2. Conditions of Approval Reference Table. Table 3. Roles and Responsibilities Table 4. Details of stakeholder consultation Table 5. Significant Communities in the offset site Table 6. Significant Fauna Recorded in the offset site Table 7. Significant Flora Recorded in the offset site Table 8. Weeds to be controlled in Justice Robert Hope Park under statutory obligations in the ACT Pest Plants and Animals (Pest Plants) Declaration 2005 (No 1) Table 9. MNES Monitoring Table 10. Comparison of quadrat averages and ranges for Justice Robert Hope Park: 2014 and 2016 Table 11. Comparison of transect averages and ranges for Justice Robert Hope Park: 2014 and 2016 List of Figures Figure 1. Location and Boundary of Justice Robert Hope Park Figure 2. Landscape Connectivity Figure 3. Extent of the Box Gum Woodland within the offset site Figure 4. Change in woody vegetation cover in Justice Robert Hope Park following habitat improvement work by the Watson Woodlands Working Group Figure 5. The location of seven vegetation monitoring plots within Justice Robert Hope Park.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 1 1. INTRODUCTION This Plan has been prepared to meet the requirements of EPBC Act approval 2012/6418. On 29 November 2013, a delegate of the Minister for the Environment approved the residential development of Block 9, Section 64, Watson; the extension of Negus Crescent; and the offsite construction of stormwater works in Justice Robert Hope Park, Australian Capital Territory. To offset the impact of the development, Justice Robert Hope Park was selected as an offset site. Condition 3 of the approval decision requires that an Environmental Management Plan is developed for the conservation and management of JRHP for the duration the impact occurs at the residential development site. While the approval decision requires the development of an Environmental Management Plan, for the purpose of maintaining consistency with naming ACT Government offset planning documents, this document is titled an Offset Management Plan. 1.1 Background The residential development of Block 9 Section 64 and the extension of Negus Crescent, Watson will significantly impact the critically endangered White Box – Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland (Box Gum Woodland), and potential habitat for the critically endangered Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia). The action is subject to conditions outlined in the EPBC Act approval decision and includes the conservation and management of JRHP (also known as Watson Woodlands) to offset the loss of four hectares of Box Gum Woodland and Regent Honeyeater habitat from the residential development. On 6 March 2017, a delegate of the Minister for the Environment and Energy, varied the approval decision. Condition 3 c was revoked to remove the requirement for an Outer Asset Protection Zone (OAPZ) within the offset site. The ACT Fire and Rescue advised that the 100 m wide OAPZ was not required and the removal of the 100 m wide OAPZ will increase the area of Box Gum Woodland that can be managed at the site. A 30 m wide Inner Asset Protection Zone is required to be maintained along the Negus Crescent Road Reserve, however, this is outside the offset area and will have no impact on the management of the offset site..
2 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 1.2 Purpose and scope To meet the requirements of condition 3 of the approval decision, this OMP provides: » » measures to maintain the condition of the Box Gum Woodland community in the offset site » » measures to maintain the habitat for the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia). » » details of the monitoring program for the Box Gum Woodland community within the offset site » » details of the consultation process with the Watson Woodlands Working Group and other relevant parties (Section 1.6) over the proposed implications of management practices outlined in this Plan and » » details of administration and funding arrangements including a schedule of anticipated costs; » » details of contingency measures if there is a measured decline in the quality of the Box Gum Woodland community (as determined by the monitoring program); and » » details regarding the management of other conservation values present in Justice Robert Hope Park that are listed under the EPBC Act and the ACT Government Nature Conservation Act 2014 (NC Act), which are not subject to the approval decision (Section 2.5). 1.3 Strategic context The management of the offset site will contribute towards delivering the commitments within other regional and national plans, strategies and policies relating to: » » the management and recovery of other nationally and locally listed threatened species (including contributing towards the ACT Government’s Action Plans for threatened species and communities). This includes the protection and management of Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolour) and Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) habitat and the Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor). » » addressing priority land management issues (e.g. reducing the impact from invasive plants and animals) » » managing nearby reserves (e.g. Mount Majura Nature Reserve) » » managing Canberra Nature Park. Table 1 provides examples of the plans and strategies that managing the offset site will contribute to deliver. a Chrysocephalum semipapposum (Clustered Everlasting) plant with little yellow flowers on the top.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 3 Table 1: Links with regional and national strategies and recovery plans Strategic Objective Title The management and recovery of threatened species and ecological communities ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013 – 2023 (ACT Government 2013) Box Gum Woodland and Derived Native Grassland The National Recovery Plan for White Box - Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland (Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW 2011) Action Plan No. 27 - ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004) Regent Honeyeater National Recovery Plan for the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera Phrygia) (Department of Environment, Australian Government 2016) Action Plan No. 27 - ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004) Woodland birds Action Plan No. 27 - ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004) Superb Parrot National Recovery Plan for the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii (Baker Gabb 2011) Action Plan No. 27 -ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004) The assessment and management of places or objects with heritage value Cultural Heritage Reporting Policy (ACT Heritage Council 2015) Addressing land management issues Pest Plants ACT Weeds Strategy 2009 – 2019 (Department of Environment, Climate Change, Energy and Water 2009) Invasive Weeds Operations Plan (IWOP) – ACT Parks and Conservation Service (annual plan) Pest Animals ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy 2012-2022 (ACT Government 2012) Vertebrate Pest Management Operations Plan – ACT Parks and Conservation Service (annual plan) Controlled Native Species Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan 2017 (ACT Government 2017) Bushfire Management ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plan Version 3 (ACT Government 2014) ACT Bushfire Operations Plan (ACT Government) (annual plan) Management of adjoining ACT Nature Reserves Draft Canberra Nature Park Plan of Management 2015-2025. ACT Government (in prep).
4 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 1.4 Specific commitments The Plan includes actions that specifically address the conditions of approval relating to the conservation and management of the offset site (Table 2). Table 2: Conditions of approval reference table. Number Condition Requirement Section 3. To compensate for the loss of Box Gum Woodland at the development site, and for the better protection of listed threatened species and communities and listed migratory species, the approval holder must develop a Justice Robert Hope Park Environmental Management Plan for the conservation and management of Justice Robert Hope Park for the duration the impact occurs at the development site. The Justice Robert Hope Park EMP must be submitted to the Minister for approval within six months of substantial commencement at the development site. The Justice Robert Hope Park EMP must include: This Plan 3a. » » details of an appropriate monitoring program to be undertaken by a suitably qualified expert, to monitor the condition of Box Gum Woodland in Justice Robert Hope Park, including undertaking baseline surveys of condition at the date of this approval; Section 5.1 3b. » » measures to maintain the condition of Justice Robert Hope Park at a standard equivalent to or better than its condition at the date of this approval (as defined in the referral documentation and Condition 3a), by such means as are necessary, including but not limited to: Section 4 (i) » » planting or seeding of native forbs and grasses consistent with the definition of EPBC Act listed Box Gum Woodland; Section 4.2.3 (ii) » » weed management to meet statutory obligations; Section 4.1.1 (iii) » » planting of trees consistent with the definition of EPBC Act listed Box Gum Woodland; Section 4.2.3 (iv) » » control of feral and domesticated animals; and Section 4.1.2 (v) » » control of unauthorised access, waste and pollution Section 4.3.1 Section 4.3.4.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 5 Number Condition Requirement Section 3c » » measures to maintain the condition, of the Outer Asset Protection Zone (OAPZ) in Justice Robert Hope Park relative to its condition at the date of this approval (as defined in the referral documentation and Condition 3a). Such management shall: 1. be undertaken in accordance with the Bushfire Risk Assessment for the Proposed Residential Development Block 9 Section 64, Watson, Australian Capital Territory prepared for the Land Development Agency (August 2012) and the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (ACT Government 2009); 2. permit understorey growth to at least 35cm; 3. retain coarse woody debris and hollows where permissible in accordance with Condition 3 c i; and 4. retain existing trees and saplings where permissible in accordance with Condition 3 c i. This condition was revoked on 6 March 2017 3d. » » consultation with local park-care groups and relevant parties over the proposed implications of management practices outlined in the Justice Robert Hope Park OMP. Section 1.6 Section 2.8 3e. » » details of administration and funding arrangements with the relevant parties who will be responsible for managing Justice Robert Hope Park including a schedule of anticipated costs. Section 1.5 Section 1.8 Section 6 5. The approval holder must maintain accurate records substantiating all activities associated with or relevant to the conditions of approval, and make them available upon request to the Department. Such records may be subject to audit by the Department or an independent auditor in accordance with Section 458 of the EPBC Act, or used to verify compliance with the conditions of approval. Summaries of audits will be posted on the Department’s website. The results of audits may also be publicised through the general media. Section 10 6. Within three months of every 12 month anniversary of substantial commencement of the action, the approval holder must publish a report on their website addressing compliance with each of the conditions of this approval, including implementation of any management plans as specified in the conditions. Documentary evidence providing proof of the date of publication and non-compliance with any of the conditions of this approval must be provided to the Department at the same time as the compliance report is published. Non-compliance with any of the conditions of this approval must be reported to the Department within 10 business days of their identification. Section 10.
6 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 1.5 Roles and responsibilities The ACT Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) will be primarily responsible for achieving the actions outlined in this Plan (unless otherwise stated) and will manage the offset site to maintain or improve the overall condition of the site in perpetuity. While the Land Development Agency (LDA) is the proponent for the development of Block 9 Section 64 Watson, the extension of Negus Crescent and offsite construction of stormwater works in Justice Robert Hope Park, the responsibility for complying with the conditions of approval have been included in the Deed of Agreement with the developer (Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd). The Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd therefore has shared responsibility (with PCS) to comply with the approval decision. Table 3 outlines the relevant roles and responsibilities associated with delivering the Plan. Table 3: Roles and responsibilities for implementing the Plan Agency Role Responsibilities EPSDD – Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) Custodian and manager of offset site and nearby Mount Majura Nature Reserve. Implement the Plan Use the results of the monitoring program to evaluate and refine management actions within the Plan Periodically review progress against performance measures Ensure all internal and external reporting requirements are met Ensure that all relevant records are effectively maintained Ensure that staff and contractors are appropriately qualified, licensed and experienced to undertake the tasks described in the Plan Provide support for volunteer Park Care activities Advise and assist management of bushfire fuel in accordance with the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (ACT Government 2014a) EPSDD - Conservation and Research Conduct research on local flora and fauna, prepare scientific advice on ecological and natural resource management, conduct ecological surveys, biodiversity monitoring, and prepare and guide the implementation of threatened species recovery plans and the reintroduction of rare species into the ACT. Assist PCS staff to interpret results from MNES monitoring programs and advise on when to adjust land management strategies to most effectively manage the MNES in line with the adaptive management strategy (Section 7). Provide general advice to PCS staff, on managing the conservation values within the offset site. Watson Woodlands Working Group Watson Woodlands Working Group is a group of volunteers with a common interest in protecting, enhancing and promoting the ecological values of the Justice Robert Hope Park. Continue to undertake activities within the offset site in line with the Parks Conservation and Lands Volunteer Policy (ACT Government 2009) and the Plan. LDA (now the Suburban Land Agency) Proponent Assist PCS in the preparation of the annual EPBC compliance report.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 7 Agency Role Responsibilities Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd Developer of Block 9 Section 64 Watson and the extension of Negus Crescent. The development includes construction of stormwater infrastructure within the Justice Robert Hope Park boundary and replacement of boundary fences along the Negus Crescent. Need to plan and undertake all works associated with the construction of stormwater infrastructure within Justice Robert Hope Park in consultation with PCS and in compliance with the Merit Track Notice of Decision (issued by EPSDD). Need to undertake all works within or along the Justice Robert Hope Park boundary in close and direct liaison with PCS. Responsibilities of the Developer in the context of compliance with the EPBC approval decision are outlined in Deed of Agreement between the Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd and the Territory. Assist PCS in the preparation of the annual EPBC compliance report. Deed Management section within EPSDD Administration and manager of the Deed of Agreement Responsible for ensuring Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd is compliant with Deed of Agreement (as referred to in the EPBC approval decision). 1.6 Statutory bodies and community consultation Consultation has been undertaken with all stakeholders identified in Table 4. This includes consultation with members of the Watson Woodlands Working Group (WWWG). This group has been actively working to improve the condition of the woodland community since the establishment of the park in 2001. Information provided by the WWWG has been utilised in developing the Plan. Table 4: Details of stakeholder consultation Stakeholder Draft Version Date consulted on draft version date Michael Mulvaney (Senior Environmental Planner, CR) 5 April 2015 Greg Baines and Murray Evans (Senior Ecologists, CR) 7 December 2016 Steve Taylor (Senior Weeds Officer, PCS) 7 November & December 2016 Watson Woodlands Working Group (Richard Larson & John Briggs) 5 and 7 May 2015, November and December 2016, February 2017 Bob Taylor (Senior Manager, Deed Management, EPSDD) 7 February 2017 Geordie Edwards (Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd) 7 February 2017.
8 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 1.7 Process for Incorporating the offset site into Canberra Nature Park The offset site is permanently protected within the ACT Reserve System. The process of applying a Pc- nature reserve overlay variation to the Territory Plan was completed on 19th August 2016. Justice Robert Hope Park will now be managed specifically for the conservation of the natural environment and to provide public use of the area for recreation, the education and research opportunities. This protection status is additional to the approval decision requirements. 1.8 Funding arrangements On-going funding to manage the offset area was secured in the ACT Government 2015–16 budget appropriation. Total funding secured is $460,000 for the first 3 years and $120,000 per year thereafter. Section 6 details how this funding will be appropriated..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 9 2. OFFSET SITE DESCRIPTION Justice Robert Hope Park (18.6 hectares) is located in Block 7, Section 72, Watson (Figure 1). Fifteen hectares of the offset site is classed as Box Gum Woodland [Jessop & Moore 2015]. It is an urban reserve that will be surrounded on three sides by residential development and urban infrastructure. The offset site is bounded to the north by Negus Crescent, to the east by Antill St, to the west by Roma Mitchell Crescent and along the southern boundary an electricity easement runs. The offset site is situated at the western base of Mount Majura and has natural links to Mount Majura Nature Reserve through partially cleared land [Nash et al. 2006]. The site is gently sloping to the south-west. 2.1 Connectivity The offset site connections traverse the Hackett Horse Holding Paddock complex to the east (refer to Figure 2). This horse paddock is designated CZ6: Leisure and Recreation zoning. Although partially cleared, remnant woodland vegetation in the horse paddocks link the offset site to Box Gum Woodland in the Mount Majura and Mount Ainslie Nature Reserves [Nash et al. 2012]. Canberra Ornithologists Group (COG) state that the site forms part of an important corridor linking Mount Majura with other woodland sites to the west through North Canberra, Mitchell and to Mulligans Flat (COG statement n.d.). This statement is supported by tracking research undertaken on Superb Parrots [Rayner et al 2016]. Tracking of Superb Parrots in northern ACT has revealed that Justice Robert Hope Park is significant foraging habitat for these threatened birds, which fly to the site from breeding areas to the north west [Rayner et al 2016]. This suggests that sufficient connectivity exists within green spaces and peri urban habitats in northern ACT to facilitate the moment of the Superb Parrot, and presumably other bird species, from Justice Robert Hope Park to woodland patches to the north and to the east of Harrison that extend into New South Wales..
10 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Map 1: Location and boundary of the Justice Robert Hope Park offset siteA map showing the Mount Majura nature reseves with green shading and the Watson Woddlands (Justice Robert Hope Park) outlined in yellow.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 11 Map 2: Landscape connectivityA map showing the EPBC listed Box Gum Woodlands with blue shading and the ACT Listed Box-Gum Woodland areas with light blue shading. A black keyline outlining the Mount Majura and Ainslie nature reservesm and a yellow keyline indicates the Justice Robert Hope Park..
12 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 2.2 Conservation significance Justice Robert Hope Park was chosen as an offset site for its significant conservation values. The primary vegetation is the critically endangered White Box – Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland (Box Gum Woodland). Figure 3 shows the extent of Box Gum Woodland in the offset site. The offset site supports large, old hollow bearing (200-400 years old) Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) and Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi) trees, which have large crowns and provide an important seasonal nectar source and valuable foraging habitat for canopy-dwelling birds and arboreal fauna (ACT Government, in prep). They also provide a range of hollows of various sizes in which birds and other woodland fauna can breed. Mistletoe can be observed in low densities scattered throughout the site providing an important foraging resource for native fauna. Justice Robert Hope Park also has a wide range of other habitat features including fallen timber, some scattered loose rock, a permanent dam and a mid- storey layer in localised areas comprising native shrubs [Nash et al 2012]. The offset site also supports six fauna species listed nationally, and / or in the ACT and NSW as threatened. This includes five species of birds, including the Superb Parrot, Swift Parrot and Regent Honeyeater, and one species of bat (Table 6). Five species of woodland plants considered rare in the ACT are also known to occur in the offset site including one that is listed as nationally endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) (Table 7) [Atlas of Living Australia 2016]. Justice Robert Hope Park also provides valuable education opportunities for local residents who are keen to learn about the natural environment and the Canberra Nature Park. 2.3 Land-use history The Ngunnawal people are the original custodians of the land that is now Justice Robert Hope Park. It was the land management practices of the indigenous people that created the open “parkland” environment that was attractive to European settlers. Post European settlement, the surrounding land was used for agriculture, particularly grazing of livestock. The offset site was a rural lease until 2001 and has a history of domestic stock grazing and partial tree clearing [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., November]. The suburb of Watson was gazetted in 1960. At this time the land in which the offset site sits was designated for tourism and residential development. In 2001, five hectares was protected from future urban development and designated as urban open space following community and environmental concerns (Larson 2008). It was soon after this that the Watson Woodlands Working Group (WWWG) were formed with their first formal working bee held on 29th September 2002 (Larson 2008). This group have subsequently been actively working to improve the condition of the conservation values within the site. Section 2.8 further describes the activities undertaken by the WWWG. In 2002 the protected area was expanded to 18 ha and on 27th July 2005 the area was formally gazetted as Justice Robert Hope Park. Justice Robert Marsden Hope AC CMG QC (1919- 1999), was a barrister, judge and the first Chairman of the Heritage Council of NSW. Justice Hope’s Committee of Inquiry into the National Estate led to acknowledgment of the concept of a National Estate and that protection as part of our heritage, see www.northcanberra.org.au/watson-woodlands- working-group-2.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 13 Map 3: Extent of Box Gum Woodland within the offset site and adjacent areasA map showing the EPBC listed Box-Gum Woodlands with blue shading. A black keyline outlining the edge of Mount Majura nature reserve and a yellow keyline indicates the Justice Robert Hope Park..
14 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 2.4 Significant communities Table 5: Significant communities in the offset site Community Common- wealth listing* ACT listing** NSW listing*** White Box – Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland critically endangered endangered endangered 2.5 Significant species 2.5.1 Fauna Table 6: Significant fauna recorded in the offset site Scientific Name Common Name Common- wealth listing* ACT listing** NSW listing*** Anthochaera phrygia Regent Honeyeater critically endangered critically endangered critically endangered Lathamus discolor Swift Parrot endangered vulnerable vulnerable Polytelis swainsonii Superb Parrot vulnerable vulnerable vulnerable Callocephalon fimbriatum Gang-gang Cockatoo - - vulnerable Chthonicola sagittata Speckled Warbler - - vulnerable Miniopterus schreibersii oceanensis Eastern Bent-winged Bat - - vulnerable 2.5.2 Flora Table 7: Significant flora recorded in the offset site Scientific Name Common Name Common- wealth listing* ACT listing ** NSW listing *** Notes Leucochrysum albicans Hoary Sunray endangered - - Considered to be rare in the ACT. Planted. Dianella longifolia var. longifolia Pale Flax Lily - - - Considered to be rare in the ACT Indigofera adesmiifolia Tick Indigo - - - Considered to be rare in the ACT. Planted. Microseris lanceolata Yam Daisy - - - Considered to be rare in the ACT. Planted. Plantago gaudichaudii Narrow Plantain - - - Considered to be rare in the ACT. Planted. *Australian Government Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act **Nature Conservation Act ***Threatened Species Conservation Act.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 15 2.6 Cultural heritage values There are currently no registered cultural heritage values identified within the offset site, however indigenous heritage artefacts that have not been identified, may be present on site. There is a nomination for the natural woodlands in the Canberra area “Molonglo River to Barton Highway Woodland” to be added to the register of cultural heritage, which would cover the offset site if successful. No other cultural heritage values (including Aboriginal or historic heritage values) have been identified to date. 2.7 Recreational values Justice Robert Hope Park is used for walking, bird- watching and nature appreciation. Dogs on leash are permitted. The rehabilitation works undertaken by the Watson Woodlands Working Group, have proven an excellent opportunity for local community engagement and environmental education more broadly. 2.8 Community involvement The WWWG have been actively working to improve the condition of the woodland since 2002. They continue to have a strong influence on the management and improvement of the park. The Friends of Mount Majura also have an active interest in Justice Robert Hope Park as an area of connected woodland. Examples of activities undertaken by the WWWG include: » » Weed management: with a particular emphasis on woody weeds and invasive herbaceous species including Serrated Tussock, African Lovegrass, Chilean Needlegrass, St John’s Wort, Patterson’s Curse and Scotch Thistle. » » Revegetation works: since 2002 the WWWG has planted approximately 700 trees and shrubs to help increase canopy density with a view to achieving benchmark levels for the Box Gum Woodland community. Revegetation of canopy species has been completed to the higher benchmark level and WWWG does not intend on planting more trees (J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December) as although no quantitative monitoring has been completed, survival of trees is reported as having been quite successful. Over 4,000 native forbs and grasses, including significant species such as the Hoary Sunray and a number of other wildflowers, have also been planted. The survivorship of these plantings has been mixed. Planting of groundcover species is to continue using those species which are locally indigenous and characteristic of Box Gum Woodland flora. The species planted are identified in Appendix A. » » Informal monitoring of planting success, emergence of new native species, informal bird census and aerial photo analysis. Figure 4 (a-e) depicts the increase in tree cover as a result of the plantings and the protection of regenerating trees and shrubs by the WWWG. PCS supports the continuation of the activities undertaken by the WWWG and aims to maintain a strong and co-operative working relationship with the group. The past achievements and future intentions of the WWWG have been a major driver in the development of the Plan. PCS and WWWG will continue to consult and engage with each other to deliver the conservation management works within the offset site, as outlined in the Plan. For a history of the WWWG and their activities: www.northcanberra.org.au/wpcontent/ uploads/2009/01/Woodlands-History1.pdf.
16 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 2.9 Other Richard Larson of the Watson Woodlands Working Group has located isolated examples of brachiopod and crinoid fossils on site which are mid-Silurian in age. This type of fossil is common in the Watson and Pialligo areas [R. Larson 2016, pers. comm., 14 November]. Map 4: Change in woody vegetation cover in Justice Robert Hope Park following habitat improvement work by the Watson Woodlands Working Group. a: 2004. b: 2009. c: 2012. d: 2014. e:2016.5 aerial photos showing the changing woody vegetation cover in Justice Robert Hope Park in 2004 top left photo 2009 top right photo 2012 middle left photod 2014 middle right photo 2016 bottom photo..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 17 3. CONSERVATION VALUES 3.1 White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland The EPBC Act approval decision recognises that the offset site includes approximately 15 hectares of Box Gum Woodland [Jessop & Moore 2015]. Another 3 hectares (approximately) supports predominantly native grass groundcover which has both natural and planted Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) trees. This adjoining area is functioning as part of the larger Box Gum Woodland patch. Figure 3 shows the extent of the Box Gum Woodland community in the offset site as recognised by the EPBC Act approval decision. The EPBC Listed Box gum Woodland layer contains the most current information on the distribution of the EPBC listed Box Gum Woodland in the ACT [assessed in November 2011]. The mapped extent of this community will be updated in time as data on changes to the extent is determined via the Box gum Woodland monitoring program. 3.1.1 Description White Box-Yellow Box- Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland ecological communities (Box Gum Woodland) can occur either as woodland or derived native grassland (i.e. grassy woodland where the overstorey has been removed). It is characterised by a species-rich understorey of native tussock grasses, herbs and scattered shrubs (where shrub cover comprises less than 30% cover), and a dominance or prior dominance of White Box (Eucalyptus albens) and/or Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi) trees. In the woodland state, tree cover is generally discontinuous and of medium height with canopies that are clearly separated [Threatened Species Scientific Committee, 2006]..
18 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 To be considered as the listed ecological community, remnant areas must also: » » have a predominantly native understorey where at least 50% of the perennial vegetation cover in the ground layer is made up of native species and » » be 0.1 hectare or greater in size, contain an understorey with at least 12 native understorey species other than grasses, as well as at least one listed important species or » » be 2 hectares or greater in size, with an average of 20 or more mature trees per hectare or displays evidence of natural regeneration of mature trees [Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW 2011]. Mature trees are defined as those with a circumference of at least 125cm at 130cm above the ground. Regeneration must consist of naturally occurring juveniles of dominant overstorey species with a circumference of at least 15cm at 130cm above the ground [Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW 2011]. Approximately 15 hectares of Justice Robert Hope Park is Box Gum Woodland. Prior to 2005 the remainder was predominantly derived grasslands as a result of past clearing [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. Since 2005 natural regeneration and supplementary planting of Yellow Box trees by the Watson Woodlands Working Group across the treeless area have returned this to regenerating woodland. The canopy is dominated by Yellow Box (approximately 80%), and Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi) (approximately 20%), with the occasional Apple Box (Eucalyptus bridgesiana). Many of these are mature trees with diameters at breast height of over 1.3m [Gilles, 2000] and are estimated to be over 200 years old [Banks 1997]. The trees with large crowns provide an important seasonal nectar source and valuable foraging habitat for canopy-dwelling birds and arboreal fauna [Nash et al 2012]. A baseline assessment of the Box Gum Woodland was completed in 2014 [Jessop and Moore 2015]. Biometric and floristic value score data was recorded at seven plots within the reserve (figure 5). The assessment found that the understorey and midstorey support a low diversity of native flora. The understorey consists of a mosaic of degraded native and exotic groundcovers, with only several isolated patches exhibiting a moderate to high groundcover diversity. This groundcover is dominated by native perennial grasses, exotic annual grasses and weeds. Native grass species present include Tall Spear Grass (Austrostipa bigeniculata) and Wallaby grasses (Rytidosperma spp.). The groundcover includes disturbance tolerant native forbs such as Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum) and a Goodenia (Goodenia pinnatifida). There are also a few scattered naturally occurring individuals of the locally rare Pale Flax Lily (Dianella longifolia var. longifolia). PCS and the WWWG have supplemented these species with plantings of native shrubs, forbs and grasses, including Tick Indigo (Indigofera adesmiifolia), Yam Daisy (Microseris lanceolata), Narrow Plantain (Plantago gaudichaudii) and Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans - a nationally listed threatened species). These four species are uncommon components of grasslands and open woodlands across the Canberra region. While the success of these plantings has been variable, in some areas, it is no longer possible to determine whether native forb populations are remnant or the product of recent reintroduction plantings [Jessop & Moore 2015]. There are at least 74 species of native forbs and grasses recorded within the offset site (Appendix A). Quadrat results are shown against 2016 monitoring data in Table 10 (section 5.6). Jessop & Moore [2015] also found that the majority of the site exhibited a high proportion of exotic annual species, particularly Wild Oats (Avena sp.), Brome Grasses (Bromus spp.) and Patterson’s Curse (Echium plantagineum), whilst approximately 2ha of the low-lying areas supported dense patches of Phalaris (Phalaris aquatica). There were also small patches of St John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum), Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana) and scattered Serrated Tussock (Nassella trichotoma) and African Lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula). When this monitoring was undertaken in 2014, weeds were relatively widespread across most of the park but in low densities. While small species such as annual Hairgrasses (Aira spp.
) have minimal ecological impact, larger perennial species such as Phalaris (Phalaris aquatica) can form dense monocultures that exclude all other species. Patches of Phalaris (Phalaris aquatica) in some sections are forming monocultures that are excluding other species. Dense growth of annual exotic grasses or Patterson’s Curse inhibits native groundcover recruitment, particularly during wetter seasons. Density also increases in lower lying areas, where nutrient levels tend to be higher and the soils remain moister for longer [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 19 3.2 Hoary Sunray 3.2.1 Description The Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor) is an everlasting-type daisy with foliage covered in white cottony hairs, and large flowers with white petals and a yellow centre. It occurs in a wide variety of grassland, woodland and forest habitats, generally on shallow, stony or relatively heavy soils [Sinclair 2010]. In Canberra, it occurs in semi-urban areas, on roadsides and in Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura Nature Reserves, being highly dependent on the presence of bare ground for germination and establishment. The seeds are wind- dispersed. Associated species are varied, but commonly include Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra) and Wallaby grasses (Rytidosperma spp.) in the ground layer, and often with a Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora), or Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi) canopy [Sinclair 2010]. Hoary Sunray has been planted in Justice Robert Hope Park together with many other native wildflower species to increase native ground cover diversity. Natural populations are known in the nearby Mount Majura Nature Reserve and it is likely they once occurred in the offset site, which has conditions suitable for their persistence. Recruitment from some of the plantings has been observed over the last three years [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. 3.2.2 Habitat requirements The Hoary Sunray is an obligate out-breeder that is entirely dependent on the transfer of pollen between individuals for successful reproduction. Pollination is affected by many different insects, including bees (Apidae) and flies (Tephritidae). Seed can probably disperse over many kilometres, will germinate fairly rapidly under a wide range of conditions, and can remain viable in the soil for at least a few months [Sinclair 2010]. The Hoary Sunray does not tolerate heavy competition from either native or exotic groundcover, and weeds can provide a threat [Sinclair 2010]. Management of weeds in Justice Robert Hope Park including Patterson’s Curse, African Love Grass, Chilean Needle Grass, St. John’s Wort and particularly annual exotic grasses (Wild Oats, Annual Rye and Brome) assists with protection of plants established in the site.close up photo of a Hoary Sunray plant with large flowers with white petals and a yellow centre.
20 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 21 3.3 Regent Honeyeater Grassy woodlands, which is habitat for the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) was fairly common in the ACT, but has been significantly depleted due to clearing for agriculture, development and firewood. The Regent Honeyeater was recorded in areas of the ACT where it is now rarely observed including the slopes of Black Mountain, along the Murrumbidgee River, Tharwa, Castle Hill, and suburban Canberra [ACT Government 2004]. The last recorded sighting in the ACT was in March 2013, and the last sighting in the vicinity of the offset site was in 1995 [Nash et al. 2012]. The ACT region lies at the maximum altitudinal limit of the distribution of the Regent Honeyeater. In this region records show a preference by the species for Box Gum Woodland along the lower slopes of Mounts Ainslie and Majura, extending through Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve to the Sutton and Lake George areas. 3.3.1 Description The Regent Honeyeater is a medium sized honeyeater with predominantly black feathers that are mottled white with yellow markings on the wings and tail [Department of the Environment 2016]. It is a striking and easily recognisable bird. As a migratory species, it would be an annual visitor to the Canberra region in Spring, although breeding records are rare – only five times in the ACT in the last fifty years [Bounds et al. 1996]. 3.3.2 Habitat requirements Nests are constructed in the branches of tall Eucalyptus species. Flowering Yellow Box (E. melliodora) is particularly important as a food and habitat resource. Insects common to the flowering gums are also an important food resource as they are fed to chicks while in the nest [Bounds et al. 1996]. Four pairs of Regent Honeyeater were observed nesting in trees adjacent to the Justice Robert Hope Park in 1995–96 when the Yellow Box (E. melliodora) trees and saplings were flowering profusely [Bounds et al. 1996]. It is noted that planted Mugga Ironbark (E. sideroxylon) at the Australian Heritage Village [to the north-west of the offset site], which has since been removed, also acted as an important food resource for these breeding birds. Breeding pairs are highly territorial. Regent Honeyeaters rely on a relatively high density of food and habitat trees, predominantly in the form of flowering canopy species with hollows, for both feeding and nesting. Justice Robert Hope Park meets these criteria, with the many mature Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) and Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi) trees providing habitat for this species. Linkages between large patches of remnant vegetation is also critical for the movement of the Regent Honeyeater across the landscape and migration more generally. The presence of food and nesting habitat within Justice Robert Hope Park and the proximity of the site to the adjacent Mount Majura woodlands make it possible that the Regent Honeyeater may revisit the site. The last sighting was however, 20 years ago and a decline in their numbers more broadly [ACT Government 2004], places question on the likelihood of this occurring. Ecologist Murray Evans [2016, pers. comm., 13 December] states that the best way to improve Regent Honeyeater habitat is to protect large Yellow Box (E. melliodora) trees which have the potential to flower profusely and ensure that there are sufficient young Yellow Box trees to grow and replace old ones as they senesce. Protection and appropriate management of Regent Honeyeater habitat within Justice Robert Hope Park will continue in the hope that the species may one day again be observed in the area..
22 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 3.4 Superb Parrot The Superb Parrot is regularly observed within Justice Robert Hope Park in summer and its visitation to the park has increased markedly since December 2014. Since then, the species has been observed frequently in the offset site, with flocks of up to 30 birds seen [J. Briggs 2015, pers. comm.]. Tracking of birds from a north Canberra breeding population has revealed that Justice Robert Hope Park is an important foraging area for the Superb Parrot [Rayner et al 2016]. 3.4.1 Description and life cycle The Superb Parrot is a slender grass-green parrot, about 400mm in length, with a distinctively long tail. The male has brilliant green plumage with yellow– green underparts. The forehead, throat and cheeks are yellow and there is a scarlet band across the neck. The female is green, with a dull bluish-green face [ACT Government 2004]. It is estimated that the Superb Parrot is sexually mature at two to three years [Low 1980]. Females lay between four to six white eggs on a bed of decayed wood in a hollow branch or a hole in the trunk of a large eucalypt [Low 1980]. Eggs are incubated for about 20 days, with chicks fledgling at about five weeks. The female remains at the nest throughout incubation and until the chicks are well developed [ACT Government 2014b]. During incubation males travel to and from foraging sites where they collect food for the sitting females. Males and females will both forage for chicks and frequently join small foraging flocks, which may also consist of non-breeding birds [Department of the Environment 2015]. In the ACT region the Superb Parrot arrives during August to breed, departing the following January. It appears to have distinctive and separate breeding and foraging areas. Breeding appears to be confined to the Central Molonglo Valley and Throsby Ridge. It is thought that between 10–20 pairs of Superb Parrot breed at each location, with little feeding activity at either breeding site [ACT Government 2014b]. Rayner et al (2016) found evidence that aggregated breeding benefited newly fledged young and this was facilitated by the clustering of multiple large, hollow bearing trees. The parrots can travel up to 10km from breeding to foraging areas, following corridors of trees [J. Bounds 2015, pers. comm.]. Foraging largely occurs within suburban Belconnen and the Gungahlin suburb of Harrison, where birds feed on the seeds or flowers of planted trees and shrubs including elms (Ulmus sp.), Red Ironbark (Eucalyptus sideroxylon), Wattles (Acacia spp.) or on grass seed on suburban sports grounds [ACT Government 2014b]. Justice Robert Hope Park has been found to be an important foraging site during bird tracking research in the 2015 breeding period [Rayner et al 2016]. The species tends to return to traditional nest sites, though use of a nest within a particular year will depend on seasonal conditions. In the non-breeding season, birds are usually in small flocks of up to 30 with equal proportions of males and females [ACT Government 2014b]. The exact relationship between breeding and non-breeding ranges is unclear [Department of the Environment 2015]. 3.4.2 Habitat requirements This species inhabits Box-Gum Woodlands where they forage in trees, understory shrubs and on the ground for their diet of grass seeds, herbaceous plants, fruits berries, nectar, grain, buds, flowers and insects [NSW Office of Environment and Heritage 2016b]. Superb Parrots preferentially seek out large (>60cm dbh) trees in Box-Ironbark forests and Woodlands because they provide reliable and predictable nectar flows. Suitable nesting trees are a critical resource. Across its range the Superb Parrot usually nests in hollow limbs or holes deep in the trunk of large woodland or riparian eucalypts, usually near a permanent water source. Preferred nesting trees in the ACT are within Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi), Yellow Box (E. melliodora) or Scribbly Gum (E. rossii) [ACT Government 2014b]..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 23.
24 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 25 3.5 Swift Parrot Small numbers of Swift Parrots (Lathamus discolor) are recorded intermittently in the ACT although not each year [Brereton 1998], and is an occasional winter visitor to Justice Robert Hope Park and more regularly in the adjacent Mount Majura Woodlands. The Swift Parrot is likely to occur anywhere in the lower elevated parts of the ACT below 700 m. Records of the species over the last 25 years are from inner Canberra suburbs and Gungahlin and Hall [ACT Government 2005]. 3.5.1 Description The Swift Parrot is a small, streamlined, bright grass green parrot, about 250mm in length. It has a dusky red spike-shaped tail, red forehead and throat bordered by yellow, and blue crown and cheeks. The male has numerous dark red markings on the face, shoulders and tail. It is a migratory species that spends winter on the Australian mainland, returning to Tasmania to breed in summer [ACT Government 2005]. 3.5.2 Habitat requirements The Swift Parrot is dependent on a diversity of habitats to provide a range of foraging resources, with emphasis on lerps and nectar availability. Use of different habitats is dependent of prevailing climatic conditions and corresponding food availability [ACT Government 2004]. Vegetation structure and proximity to foraging sites are likely to be important for roost site selection however further information is required to identify these habitat components and their importance for the species. The Swift Parrot is mainly an arboreal feeder, usually in the outer canopy of Eucalyptus trees. Their main food is nectar, also psyllids, seeds and fruit. They occasionally come to ground to drink and feed on seeds and fallen material [Higgins 1999]. Due to the variable production of nectar and lerps across the range of the Swift Parrot, it needs a broad range of habitats to provide a range of foraging resources including Box Gum Woodlands. Urban impacts, grazing and declining tree health all contribute to reduced tree regeneration which alters the age structure of woodland habitat, and reduces the long- term viability of foraging resources. Swift Parrots are less likely to occur in degraded foraging sites as the abundance of large, aggressive nectar feeders (e.g. Noisy Miner, Manorina melanocephala) is higher [ACT Government 2004]..
26 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 3.6 Other conservation assets Four locally rare plants, a regionally vulnerable bat and other woodland birds (Section 2.5) are also known to occur in Justice Robert Hope Park [Atlas of Living Australia 2016]. 3.6.1 Woodland birds Two woodland birds, the Gang Gang Cockatoo (Callocephalon fimbriatum) and the Speckled Warbler (Chthonicola sagittata) are considered to be declining in the ACT and are listed as vulnerable in NSW. Both are heavily reliant on woodland habitat for foraging and breeding. The woodlands of Justice Robert Hope Park provide known habitat for both species. The Speckled Warbler has raised young in the area [Canberra Ornithologists Group, n.d.]. There are numerous other woodland birds recorded in the adjacent Mount Majura Nature Reserve that are likely to expand their ranges into Justice Robert Hope Park if woodland condition and connectivity are improved. Nash et al. (2009) provide a detailed list and assessment. 3.6.2 Habitat requirements Habitat connectivity and diversity are critical for woodland birds. The offset site is an important component of a regionally important woodland link [Barrett and Love 2012]. Priority must be given to maintaining or creating connectivity between remnant woodland patches, and providing a range of habitat values including: » » maintaining a diverse understorey of shrubs, herbs and forbs » » maintaining areas of grassland that support insects and other invertebrates » » providing fallen timber for additional foraging habitat and » » preserving large living and dead trees for perching, roosting, nesting and foraging [ACT Government 2004]. Habitat diversity will also contribute towards reducing the competitive advantage of the native Noisy Miner (Manorina melanocephala), which can exclude other birds through aggressive behaviour. 3.6.3 Other species The locally vulnerable Australasian Bent-winged Bat (Miniopterus schreibersii subsp. oceanensis) is also known to frequent Justice Robert Hope Park, and is thought to utilise tree hollows as roosting sites [Atlas of Living Australia 2016a].a pair of Gang Gang Cockatoo sitting in a gum tree.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 27 4.  HABITAT IMPROVEMENT PLAN The following sections describe the current management issues applicable to the offset site and outlines how these issues will be addressed. The actions to address these issues will both complement and be additional to the pre-existing land management actions undertaken by PCS and the WWWG. Actions identified in this section will also contribute towards fulfilling conditions outlined in the approval decision. 4.1 Over-abundant or invasive plants, animals and pathogens 4.1.1 Invasive plants In accordance with the approval conditions, weed management must be undertaken to meet statutory obligations. Table 8 identifies weeds that are present within Justice Robert Hope Park and that are of high priority for control. Table 8: Weeds to be controlled in Justice Robert Hope Park under statutory obligations in the ACT Pest Plants and Animals (Pest Plants) Declaration 2005 [ACT Government 2012b]. Common Name Scientific Name Weed of National Significance* ACT Declaration** African Lovegrass Eragrostis curvula No Must be contained Chilean Needlegrass Nassella neesiana Yes Must be contained/prohibited Cotoneaster Cotoneaster spp. No Prohibited Paterson’s Curse Echium plantagineum No Must be contained Scotch Thistle Onopordum acanthium No Must be contained Serrated Tussock Nassella trichotoma Yes Must be contained/prohibited St John’s Wort Hypericum perforatum No Must be contained * www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/invasive/weeds/weeds/lists/wons.html ** www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/575071/ACT-Weeds-Strategy-2009-2019.pdfa feild of african lovegrass.
28 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Weed control will be undertaken to contain the weeds listed in Table 8 and meet statutory requirements and reduce the threat to the MNES. Weed control programs will be delivered by appropriately trained and licenced contractors, staff and volunteers, who are experienced in working in areas of high conservation value and are able to differentiate weeds from the native plants species (including the native grasses, herbs and forbs) that occur on the site. Any incursions of new weed species (both within the reserve and along the adjacent roadside) will also be promptly controlled. PCS staff, contractors and volunteers will continue to map all weed control activities undertaken within the offset site to monitor weed distribution and record any new outbreaks, particularly for the key weed species. A summary of the weed management activities carried out each year will be included in the annual report. Maps of weeds treated over the 2016–17 financial year, including density and extent figures (Appendix 3). Areas of bare ground resulting from weed spraying will be seeded with native grasses including Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra) and/ or revegetated with locally indigenous native plants which form part of the Box Gum Woodland community. An experiment will be undertaken by the WWWG in collaboration with PCS to spray out areas of Phalaris and seed the areas with Kangaroo Grass. Three plots, each up to 20m x 20m in area (see Figure 5) will be mown and sprayed out in Autumn and again in Spring of 2017. The plots will be fenced and sown to Kangaroo Grass in Autumn/Winter of 2018 using seed harvested or acquired by PCS [J. Briggs and N. Bruns 2016, pers. comm., December]. It is hoped the Kangaroo Grass will grow to form a dense stand that will out-compete the exotic grasses [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. Prior to the conduct of weed control activities, PCS will ensure contractors and volunteers are briefed on the area’s values, weeds to be targeted, areas to avoid and other matters to ensure avoidable secondary impacts do not occur (e.g. spray drift and impact on non-target species). All vehicles are to be cleaned prior and after site entry to avoid weed spread. 4.1.2 Invasive animals The dominant invasive animals at the site are rabbits and foxes. Cats, some of which may live in adjacent residential areas, are also occasionally seen in the park. Dogs are permitted in the reserve, but only on leads and are not considered to be an invasive animal in this context. The control of foxes is usually undertaken using 1080 baits and shooting. Due to the offset site’s proximity to residential housing, these methods of control are not available. Rabbits can become over-abundant following good seasons and severely impact on native vegetation. Grazing and burrowing by rabbits can cause erosion, reduce the recruitment and survival of native flora as well as threatening the survival of a number of native fauna species by altering habitat, reducing food resources, displacing small native mammals from their burrows and attracting introduced predators such as foxes [NSW Office of Environment and Heritage 2016a]. Rabbits can also cause significant losses and damage to native forb species by digging around the root crowns [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., November]. For this reason, it is essential that grazing pressure from rabbits is managed to ensure that sustainable levels of native plant recruitment are achieved and revegetated plants are protected. Rabbit control works were undertaken in 2016 (burrows fumigated). Rabbit populations will be appropriately managed within the offset site and in accordance with the ACT Pest Management Strategy [ACT Government 2012a]. All efforts will be made to control rabbits in conjunction with neighbouring land managers..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 29 4.1.3 Invasive pathogens There are no known pathogen infestations in Justice Robert Hope Park. The incidence of Phytophthora cinnamomi in the ACT is low and there is no known record of P. cinnamomi within the offset site or surrounding landscape. Nonetheless, dieback caused by P. cinnamomi is a key threatening process to the Box Gum Woodland community under the EPBC Act. Once present it can dramatically modify the structure and composition of native plant communities, resulting in habitat degradation for dependant flora and fauna [Commonwealth of Australia 2014]. To reduce the risk of P. cinnamomi entering the offset site, staff, contractors and volunteers will be educated on the threat imposed by P. cinnamomi and procedures to follow in order to reduce the risk of infection. Following guidelines in the Threat abatement plan for disease in natural ecosystems caused by Phytophthora cinnamomi (Commonwealth of Australia 2014a), activities will include: » » cleaning vehicles and equipment before entering the offset site » » ensuring P. cinnamomi hygiene protocols are included in works contracts » » avoiding or minimising the importation of raw materials (e.g. gravel, sand, soil and water). It is noted that if an infestation occurs, chemical control options are very limited and prevention is the best management strategy. 4.2 Enhancement 4.2.1 Biomass management » » Natural grassy ecosystems require active biomass management to maintain their ecological condition, to provide habitat for component species, to promote recovery of threatened species and to reduce threats to the ecological community, such as weed infestation (ACT Government, in prep). Options for biomass management include grazing (by native herbivores), mowing, slashing and burning (ACT Government, in prep). Grazing The preferred method for grass biomass management is grazing by native herbivores (kangaroos), with other methods (fire/slashing/mowing) used in circumstances where grazing by native herbivores is unable to maintain the desired grass biomass/structure at a site (ACT Government, in prep). » » The ground layer biomass is grazed by kangaroos. Rabbits are also applying browsing pressure but their control will reduce this degree of pressure. There are no plans to allow cattle or sheep grazing in Justice Robert Hope Park as these animals will cause damage to the regenerating forbs, shrubs and trees. Mowing and/or slashing Mowing will not be used extensively due to the restricted access resulting from the large amount of young trees planted throughout the offset site. Mowing will be used to maintain management and walking trails. Small patches of dense exotic grasses will be mown in some years when the grasses are starting to flower in order to prevent seeding and hopefully to thus reduce future exotic grass densities in these areas. Ecological burning PCS does not commit to implement an ecological burning program within the offset site over the life of the Plan. PCS does however, reserve the right to undertake an ecological burning trial, if at the advice of a suitably qualified ecologist, considerers it beneficial for the management of the Box Gum Woodland community. This is in line with an adaptive management strategy. The implementation of any ecological burning trial is dependent on the availability of staff and equipment resources. Any ecological burns will comply with the Ecological Guidelines for Fuel and Fire Management Operations [Kitchin and Matthews 2012]. ..
30 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 4.2.2 Regeneration Woodland trees began to regenerate in several places within Justice Robert Hope Park following the end of the long drought in 2010. By this time domestic stock grazing had also been removed from the reserve. The WWWG began extensive planting of trees in the reserve in 2005 and by 2010 most of the site where there was low or no tree cover had been planted. Regeneration of indigenous trees and shrubs will be promoted within the Box Gum Woodland to improve connectivity and wildlife movement between the offset site, the adjacent reserves and the surrounding landscape. Regenerating canopy species may also eventually form hollows and provide nesting sites for the Superb Parrot and other woodland birds. The aim is for tree and shrub cover to reach the benchmark, condition of the Box Gum Woodland community [ACT Government 2015a]. Environmental monitoring undertaken in 2014 [Jessop & Moore 2015] indicates that the canopy is typical of natural woodlands in that it is scattered and supports a up to 18.5% projected foliage cover. This canopy cover figure is within ACT vegetation benchmark level (11–32% foliage cover) [ACT Government 2015a]. Midstorey projected foliage cover was between 0.8% and 8.3%, and predominantly consisted of regenerating woodland tree saplings, with few shrubs [Jessop & Moore 2015]. This figure is also within ACT vegetation benchmark level (0 and 12.5%) [ACT Government 2015a]. The WWWG planted small numbers of the threatened Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor) within the offset site and this has subsequently started naturally regenerating nearby to the planted areas. It is almost certain that this regeneration is from seed distributed from the planted specimens [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. Weed control, pest animal management and the use of tree guards to protect seedlings will reduced the threats to regenerating trees and shrubs within Justice Robert Hope Park. 4.2.3 Revegetation WWWG and PCS have planted trees, shrubs and groundcover plants within the offset site. The flora list in Appendix 1 identifies which species have been planted and which grow naturally within the site. Sufficient canopy species have been planted to exceed the benchmark for Box Gum Woodlands once these plantings mature. There are no plans to plant any more trees within the offset site. Planted trees have been protected with tree guards made of wire netting, which are left in place for up to 3 years [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. Further planting of mid layer shrub species will occur in patches within the reserve to provide mid story bird habitat as well as structural complexity to the reserve. This would have the added benefit of reducing impacts by the introduced Indian Myna and the native Noisy Miner who prefer a more open woodland setting. A correlation has been found between increased shrub cover in revegetation sites, and reduced Noisy Miner numbers [N. Taws 2015, pers. comm.] as they prefer an open flight path for feeding. Some shrubs have been planted in patches throughout the offset site and more will be planted using species characteristic of the Box Gum Woodland community including Australian Blackthorn (Bursaria spinosa) and Wattles (five Acacia spp.) [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. At the time of the 2014 monitoring, native forb cover and diversity is well below benchmark across most of the reserve [Jessop & Moore 2015]. Future forb planting programs will focus on species that were found to be the most successful in previous plantings by the WWWG. This includes included Lemon Beauty Heads (Calocephalus citreus), Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum) and Clustered Everlasting (Chrysocephalum semipapposum). Forb plantings will focus on areas with least exotic grass and other weed species present and these could include the halo areas developing under the expanding canopies of planted and naturally recruited trees. [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., November]. The WWWG have observed that planted trees and more recently naturally recruited trees create a “halo effect” whereby the exotic grass cover in most seasons is heavily supressed beneath the tree canopies out to the drip line. The number and size of “halo” areas will increase as planted trees become further established..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 31 A weed control experiment (detailed in Section 4.1.1) aimed at reducing the extent of Phalaris will include revegetating bare areas (after mowing and a series of herbicide applications) with Kangaroo Grass seed. It is hoped the Kangaroo Grass will grow to form a dense stand that will out-compete the exotic grasses [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. Forb re-introductions in the vicinity of monitoring plots 1, 3 and 6 [Jessop & Moore 2015] have met with varying success [J. Briggs 2016, pers. comm., December]. Any revegetation works will abide by the following principles: » » The objective will be for tree cover, mid story and ground layer to be maintained within or increased to benchmark levels for the Box Gum Woodland community (species richness 35, tree cover 11–32%, shrub cover 0–12.5%, native grass cover 23 –63%, other native groundcover 8-16.5%) [ACT Government 2015a]. » » Any future shrubs plantings will be configured in clumps, with the clumps spaced at a minimum distance of 150m to assist in the movement of the Superb Parrot and other woodland birds across the landscape. » » Emphasis will be given to planting local native plant species that improve foraging and nesting habitat for woodland birds, including the Superb Parrot and Regent Honeyeater. » » All revegetated plants will be protected by tree guards and/or fenced to protect them from rabbits and/or kangaroos. Any fencing around regenerated plants would need to remain for at least 3 years to protect from grazing [G. Fifield 2015, pers. comm.]. » » All revegetation projects will be subject to a monitoring and maintenance program. 4.2.4 Erosion and soil disturbance There is a small risk of erosion occurring on gentle slopes above the sump located in the western corner of Justice Robert Hope Park. There are no signs of significant erosion within the park. The site will be managed to avoid instances of heavy soil disturbance. This includes limiting vehicle access across the site during or after rain periods, when soils are wet. 4.2.5 Placement of woody debris Habitat diversity will be increased slightly in the offset site through the addition of a small amount of large diameter woody debris salvaged from the adjacent development area. The additional woody debris increases the protection of small plants from grazing at a local scale and will provide unique micro-habitats that are beneficial to both fauna and flora species [ACT Government in prep]. Any additional woody debris available will be placed around the lower retention basin. 4.2.6 Improving frog habitat To improve frog habitat, woody debris will been placed within and around the retention basin within the western section of the Offset site. Frog habitat will be regulated through monthly water quality testing by the WWWG [Waterwatch Australia Steering Committee 2002]. The data gathered is submitted to ACT Waterwatch and is uploaded to the Atlas for Living Australia [R. Larson 2016, pers. comm., December]. PCS will monitor the frogs within the dam using the ACT Frogwatch frog census method (Frogwatch ACT and Region 2008). Frogs will be monitored concurrently with the annual Frogwatch census..
32 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 4.3 Assets and Infrastructure 4.3.1 Fencing (control of unauthorised access) The majority of Justice Robert Hope Park is fenced and some internal fencing is present. Internal fencing has been assessed and is considered redundant. This fencing is to be removed although temporary fencing will be erected where it is necessary to protect regeneration or revegetation. There are four gates that provide public access, and a further three locked gates that provide vehicle access to the park. One is located on the Stirling Avenue side, one on Antill St and one on Negus Crescent. These gates are kept locked to control unauthorised access. The fencing on the western side may be removed to allow the installation of drains from the proposed development site and if removed, will be replaced as part of the drain installation works. The fence on the northern side is outside the offset site boundary and crosses the area designated for the extension of Negus Crescent. The gate on Negus Crescent will require moving or replacement with the construction of the new section of road and removal of the existing fence. This section of fencing, and its associated gate, will be replaced as part of the road construction by the developer. Timing for any fence removal and replacement will largely be determined by the timeframe for the development of Block 9, Section 64, Watson, and the Negus Crescent extension. Any new fencing will be erected using wildlife friendly specifications. The fence on the southern side (Stirling Avenue) does not fully align with the current reserve boundary and will require partial replacement. The fence on the eastern side (Antill Street) is correctly aligned but needs some repairs and the addition of two Kangaroo entry ‘gates’. PCS will remove and replace the boundary fences on the eastern and southern sides of Justice Robert Hope Park to control unauthorised access. Two Kangaroo gates will be installed on the eastern side of Justice Robert Hope Park to improve movement of Kangaroos between Justice Robert Hope Park and adjacent woodland areas. The new boundary fence will be erected using wildlife friendly specifications. Access gates will be added or replaced to address any future increase in visitor numbers. Unauthorised access will be controlled by ensuring gates large enough for a vehicle to pass through will remain locked at all times when not in use by PCS or the WWWG. 4.3.2 Tracks and trails Existing tracks provide minimal access to the site. There are poorly defined management tracks entering the reserve in the north-east corner which will be kept maintained via slashing. A formed track with markers is proposed to provide more suitable access for local residents into the reserve. The route of this track is to be determined in discussion with PCS and WWWG and will be designed to minimise disturbance to vegetation within the reserve. 4.3.3 Visitor infrastructure To meet the conditions of approval for the residential development of Block 9 Section 64, Watson, domestic animals must be controlled within the offset site. Totems with prominent ‘Dogs on leash’ signage will also be installed. General park signage and signs identifying prohibited activities will be installed or upgraded at access points as appropriate. Old park information signage will be replaced. New signage will provide visitors with information about the natural conservation values found within the offset site, including the significance of the fossils. 4.3.4 Waste and pollution Rubbish is rarely dumped within the offset site. Any waste or rubbish (including old fencing materials) will however, be removed by PCS. When internal fences are removed, all fencing materials will be removed from the site. The offset site includes a stormwater settling pond that receives water from the adjacent residential development. Any incidents of pollution in the stormwater that enters the settling pond will be reported to the EPA by PCS staff..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 33 4.4 Community Engagement 4.4.1 Recreation Justice Robert Hope Park is regularly used by members of the public. Dogs are permitted providing they stay on a leash and are kept under control at all times. Justice Robert Hope Park will continue to be accessible to the WWWG to undertake a variety of rehabilitation works, and other members of the community for passive recreation such as bird watching and walking. A new track consisting of a slash line will be constructed and defined using track markers. General park signage and signs identifying prohibited activities will be installed or upgraded at access points as appropriate (Section 4.8.3). 4.4.2 Interpretation Existing interpretive signage is old and faded. New signage highlighting the conservation values within Justice Robert Hope Park will installed at key entrance points into the reserve. 4.5 Managing Cultural Heritage Values The ACT Government Heritage Act 2004 includes specific provisions that require a person to report the discovery of an Aboriginal place or object to the Heritage Council within five working days. There are also provisions and penalties that apply if a person damages any Aboriginal place or object in the ACT (ACT Government 2015b). The Cultural Heritage Reporting Policy (ACT Heritage Council 2015) details the cultural assessment and reporting requirements for projects that could impact on places or objects with heritage value. This may include some operational and habitat restoration projects. A cultural heritage assessment and associated reporting will be undertaken in accordance with the guidelines described in this document. The ACT Heritage Unit can provide further advice on assessment requirements..
34 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 35 5. MONITORING PLAN All monitoring will be undertaken by ACT Government staff or the WWWG Opportunities will also be provided to community groups and volunteers to participate in the monitoring program, where appropriate. Monitoring results will underpin continual improvement of restoration techniques under an adaptive framework, and will be documented as part of annual reporting (and published on the internet). Accurate records will be kept for all activities to ensure reporting and monitoring requirements are met. The results of the monitoring program will also be disseminated within the ACT Government to better inform the management of the conservation values within the ACT, and will feed into a process of review and adaptive management. An assessment of the extent and condition of the Box Gum Woodland community in the offset site was undertaken in 2014 [Jessop & Moore 2015]. This assessment was undertaken following the NSW Biometric methods [NSW Government 2011] as specified by the ACT Government [Jessop & Moore 2015]. This assessment provides a baseline from which PCS can demonstrate maintenance or improvement in the general extent and quality of the Box Gum Woodland community within this offset site and compliance with the primary objective identified in Section 1.3. Monitoring results will be assessed by PCS staff and ACT Government ecologists. The results will enable a direct comparison of the habitat quality against benchmark condition [ACT Government 2015a] as well as being able to monitor change compared to baseline over time. Vegetation benchmarks are quantitative measures of variables within vegetation communities from a reference site i.e. a site with minimal modification or disturbance [ACT Government 2016b]. The benchmarks provide an indication of the quality of a site compared to an unmodified, high quality site. 5.1 Monitoring MNES 5.1.1 Box Gum Woodland mapping A greater understanding of the quality and extent of BGW is required across the ACT woodland offset reserves to help inform land management actions and future monitoring programs. Mapping the condition of patches will support management decisions at each offset site including targeting appropriate restoration and weed management areas, and guiding planting requirements such as tree, shrub or understorey plantings. Detailed community condition mapping took place in spring (October – November) 2017. The on ground boundaries of the Plant Community Type (PCT) were first accurately mapped using a GPS. Following this the mapped PCTs were divided into vegetation zones based on visible differences including structure, floristic composition and intactness of the vegetation, and mapped on ground using a GPS. Vegetation zones for Box Gum Woodland include: » » Appropriate canopy present, canopy regeneration, native dominated groundstorey, high, moderate or low diversity of forbs » » Appropriate canopy absent, native dominated groundstorey, high, moderate or low diversity of forbs » » Appropriate canopy present, exotic dominated groundstorey, canopy regeneration absent or present » » Appropriate canopy absent, exotic dominated groundstorey. Once detailed woodland condition mapping has been completed, the location of monitoring plots will be assessed to ensure that monitoring represents all vegetation types and conditions within the reserve..
36 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 5.1.2 Box Gum Woodland monitoring A baseline assessment of the habitat quality and floristic diversity within the Box Gum Woodland community in the offset site was undertaken in spring 2014 using the NSW Biometric Method [NSW Government 2011]. Seven permanent monitoring plots were established [Jessop & Moore 2015]. See section 3.1.1 for the baseline description. Future monitoring will be undertaken by a suitably qualified contractor at least every three years from the baseline assessment in spring 2014, using the same methodology as previously [Jessop & Moore 2015]. However monitoring will take place more frequently initially to remain consistent with the offsets Box Gum Woodland monitoring program, allowing seasonal comparisons across reserves (Table 9). The monitoring uses biometric methods [NSW Government 2011], which is consistent with the methods required for the ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator [ACT Government 2016b]. This method includes measurements of native and exotic species diversity, percentage cover of native grass, forbs, shrubs and canopy and presence of woody debris. Vegetation monitoring also includes the floristic value score (FVS) methods defined by Rehwinkel (2007, 2015), which uses plant diversity and cover measurements to calculate a score. These combined methods provide structural and compositional indicators that can be linked to vegetation condition and habitat quality [Gibbons et al 2009, Lawley et al 2016[. Consequently these indicators can be reviewed against the benchmark condition for the vegetation type to determine vegetation condition and fauna habitat quality. The results will be assessed against 2014 benchmark condition (see Tables 10 and 11) and assessed to monitor change compared to baseline over time [Rehwinkel 2007]. This assessment methodology provides a standard baseline from which PCS can demonstrate any change in the quality and extent of the Box Gum Woodland community within this offset site and compliance with the primary objective identified in Section 1.4. A comparative analysis of the 2014 and 2016 monitoring results is presented and discussed further in section 5.6. 5.1.3 Hoary Sunray Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor) populations have been established within the Offset by ParkCare volunteers through the successful translocation of seed sourced from the adjacent Mount Majura Nature Reserve. As the established patches of Hoary Sunray are not located within the long-term box-gum woodland monitoring plots, a separate monitoring methodology is required. Baseline data on the Hoary Sunray population was collected in spring (October) 2017. Two populations, and three patches, were found in the reserve. The boundaries of each patch were walked with a GPS, and the length and width measured with a measuring tape. In each patch, a 1m x 1m quadrat was used to count plants. The quadrat was placed randomly within the site, and counts repeated until the average was considered to represent variation in numbers in each patch. The patch and count details were mapped and recorded as a spatial (GIS) layer Subsequent monitoring will occur every 3 years to observe any change in extent and density. Monitoring is programmed to appropriate seasonal windows (spring flowering). The longevity of the ‘everlasting daisy’ flowers provides a sufficient window to account for stochastic events, such as adverse weather patterns or fire conditions. Spring burns/wildfire could influence detectability. Accordingly population data for Hoary Sunray is disseminated to the ACT Government Protected Plants (GIS) layer and subsequent versions of the ACT Emergency Services Bushfire Suppression Atlas. As a consequence future burn planning can account for the Hoary Sunray populations and their monitoring requirements. Management actions aim to improve the habitat in line with the National Recovery Plan for the Hoary Sunray Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor [Sinclair 2010]. Specifically, recovery action 4.1 states that management should control threats to this species from pest plants. PCS has committed to target key weeds that are a statutory obligation to control, which will lead to an improvement in this species’ habitat. The control of exotic grasses, some of which are a statutory obligation to control, will also result in a significant improvement in this species’ habitat. The experimental control of Phalaris discussed in section 4.1.1, if successful, will result in the creation of areas of suitable habitat for Hoary Sunray..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 37 Table 9: MNES monitoring program schedule Monitoring activity Parameters measured Timeframe Guidelines Box Gum Woodland monitoring » » 20m x 20m plot » » Native plant species richness » » Floristic Value Score » » Photo-monitoring (NE corner) » » 50m transect » » Native over-storey cover » » Native mid-storey cover » » Native ground cover (grass, shrubs and other) » » Exotic plant cover » » 20m x 50m plot » » Number of large trees » » Number of trees with hollows » » Total length of fallen logs » » Entire zone » » Regeneration of canopy species » » Spring (October – November): 2014 (complete), 2016 (complete), 2018, 2019, 2020, 2023, 2026, 2029 and 2032 » » Floristic Value Score: A Revised Floristic Value Scoring Method to assess grassland condition [Rehwinkel 2015]. » » Monitoring methods: Operational Manual for BioMetric 3.1. A tool for assessing clearing and ecological thinning proposals on terrestrial biodiversity under the Native Vegetation Act 2003 [NSW Government 2011]. » » Monitoring Guidelines for Box-Gum Woodlands [ACT Government 2015c]. » » ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Operational Manual [ACT Government 2016b]. Box Gum Woodland mapping » » Extent of Box Gum woodland community and community condition classes within the reserve » » Spring (October – November): 2017 (complete), 2027 and 2033 » » Plant community type mapping: Monitoring Guidelines for Box-Gum Woodlands (ACT Government 2015c). » » Condition class mapping methods developed by the Capital Ecology in consultation with ACT Government. Hoary Sunray monitoring Population size and density of Hoary Sunray Spring (during peak flowering as indicated by nearby Mt Majura populations, to improve detectability): 2017 (complete), 2020, 2023, 2026, 2029 and 2032 Methods developed in consultation with the vegetation ecologist at Conservation Research (ACT Government)..
38 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 5.2 Monitoring other conservation values Other conservation values including the presence and abundance of rare and declining plants will be monitored as part of the floristic monitoring of the Box Gum Woodland. 5.3 Monitoring invasive plants PCS staff and contractors will continue to utilise the collector application when undertaking weed control to gather data on the species of weed and the area within which that species is controlled. This data is then uploaded to ArcGIS to enable assessment of any change in extent of the weed species controlled. This monitoring will be undertaken whenever weed control works occur. 5.4 Photo monitoring points Seven photo monitoring points (see Figure 5) have been established in Justice Robert Hope Park, located at the north-east corner of each vegetation monitoring plot. These will be monitored at the same time as floristic surveys. Aerial photography will also be able to track changes in vegetation cover over time, particularly for mid and upper storey species..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 39 Map 5: The location of seven vegetation monitoring plots within Justice Robert Hope Park. A map showing the location of seven vegetation monitoring plots within Justice Robert Hope Park. Each point indicates the north-east corner of the 20x20m and 20x50m plot, and the location of photo monitoring points. 3 Experimental Phalaris aquatica control plots are indicated (aerial photo)..
40 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Each point indicates the north-east corner of the 20x20m and 20x50m plot, and the location of photo monitoring points. Experimental Phalaris aquatica control plots are shown in pink. 5.5 Water quality and frog monitoring A constructed dam (associated with former agricultural land use on the site) is located in the south-east corner of JRHP (see figure 3). This water body has been selected for long term water quality and frog monitoring in collaboration with WWWG, Frogwatch and Waterwatch program coordinators – as this action is delivered by these partners. The respective monitoring methodologies are outlined within the Community Frogwatch Census Kit (Mantle 2008) and the ACT Waterwatch Volunteer Manual [Waterwatch 2016]. The regional Frogwatch and Waterwatch programs are facilitated by dedicated volunteer coordinators who brief participants on appropriate monitoring methods. For example, no amphibians are trapped during the Frogwatch monitoring program. Frog calls are recorded for identification, in addition to any visual observations from the bank. All Macro-Invertebrates (waterbugs) collected within water samples are returned to the source after on-site Waterwatch monitoring. Water quality will be monitored within the offset site monthly by the WWWG in accordance with the Waterwatch Guidelines (Waterwatch Australia Steering Committee, 2002). The annual Frogwatch census occurs over 1-2 nights, during a 2 week-long data collection period, scheduled during October each year. Frogwatch reports are archived for public viewing on the Gininderra Catchment Group webpage. Waterwatch reports are archived for public viewing on the ACT Government Waterwatch webpage. Data for both programs is stored within the Atlas of Living Australia public database. 5.6 Performance measures, benchmarks and completion criteria The primary offset commitment to which all management actions within the JRHP OMP support is to: “maintain the condition of Justice Robert Hope Park at a standard equivalent to or better than its condition at the date of this approval” (Condition 3b; Table 2). Accordingly, the completion criteria for this site is to ‘maintain’ the quality and extent of Box Gum Woodland (and associated woodland bird habitat) within JRHP, at a standard equivalent to or better than the 2014 baseline condition indicators. To determine whether implemented management actions (section 4. Habitat Improvement Plan) have maintained Box Gum Woodland quality and extent within JRHP, to a standard equivalent to or better than the 2014 baseline indicators, field based monitoring (section 5. Monitoring Plan) will be delivered every 3 years as part of an adaptive land management approach (section 7. Adaptive Management). Comparing data collected in subsequent monitoring years against the 2014 baseline allows for evidence based performance targets to be derived for each 3-year OMP review, if condition indicators are assessed as having declined from the 2014 baseline..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 41 5.6.1 Maintaining Box Gum Woodland (and the associated woodland bird habitat) Comparative results of the 2014 and 2016 monitoring are presented in Table 10 (quadrat) and Table 11 (transect). As SMEC (2017) explain in the report ACT Box-Gum Woodland Offset Monitoring 2016 (section 3.6.3): “There are no substantial changes in either the quadrat or transect metrics recorded at Justice Robert Hope Park between 2014 and 2016, indicating that the site is relatively stable”. SMEC suggest that the variation observed between years was likely to be a combination of: minor differences in transect alignments; and seasonal variation in groundcover composition. From a land management perspective, the only cautionary results were a marginal increase in the ‘weed score’ and the ‘presence of significant weeds’ within monitoring plots. As SMEC (2017) explain, after high winter rainfall in 2016, exotic annual grasses formed dense swathes through the offset site. As the monitoring data was collected in September 2016, the influence of seasonal weather factors is further supported by Australian Government Bureau of Meteorology data, which confirms that the four months from June to September 2016 were the wettest such period on record for the ACT, with rainfall 127% above average recorded at Canberra Airport (Australian Government BOM, 2017). Other quadrat metrics were generally consistent between years. Minor variation in metrics that would be expected to be largely static, such as canopy cover and the number of large trees, is likely to be due to minor variation in the physical plot layout. Transect metrics have more difference between the years, which is likely to be a combination of minor differences in transect alignment and seasonal variation in groundcover composition. Table 10: Comparison of quadrat averages and ranges for Justice Robert Hope Park: 2014 and 2016. Metric Average 2014 Average 2016 Range 2014 Range 2016 NPS 8.9 9 4-28 5-26 EPS 10.4 12.6 8-12 8-17 NLT 1.1 0.9 0-3 0-2 FL 14.2 18.5 0-93 0-84 OR N/A 1 N/A 0.7-1 HBT 0.4 0.7 0-1 0-2 TS 0.1 0.1 0-1 0-1 SW 0.9 1.1 0-1 0-3 WS 6.4 9.7 3.2-8.9 5.1-15.7 FVS 5.7 5.6 0.6-27.5 1-24.2 NPS: number of native plant species (0.04 ha plot); EPS: number of exotic plant species (0.04 ha plot); QRA: qualitative regen abundance (0.04 ha plot); QRH: qualitative regen health (0.04 ha plot); NLT: number of large trees in 0.1 ha plot; FL: length of fallen logs in 0.1 ha plot; OR: proportion of native overstorey species regenerating in vegetation zone; HBT: hollow-bearing trees (0.1 ha plot); TS: number of threatened plant species (0.04 ha plot); SW: significant weeds in each plot (0.04 ha); WS: weed score; FVS: floristic value score..
42 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Table 11: Comparison of transect averages and ranges for Justice Robert Hope Park: 2014 and 2016. Plot Average 2014 Average 2016 Range 2014 Range 2016 NOS 9.9 18.1 0-18.5 0-30 NMS 4.9 2.6 0.8-8.3 0-7 NGCG 19.1 14 2-36 2-44 NGCS 0.6 0.3 0-2 0-2 NGCO 0 1.1 0 0-6 ECAG 60 59.7 24-92 2-98 ECPG 12 0.6 0-72 0-2 ECO - 17.4 - 6-30 LWX - 13.7 - 0-84 L 7.1 21.9 0-18 6-46 R 0 0.3 0 0-2 BG 1.4 5.4 0-8 0-12 C 0 0.6 0 0-2 NOS: native overstorey cover (50 m transect); NMS: native midstorey cover (50 m transect); NGCG: native ground cover – grasses (50 mtransect); NGCS: native ground cover – subshrubs (50 m transect); NGCO: native ground cover – ‘other’ (50 m transect); ECAG: exoticannual cover - grasses (50 m transect); ECPG: exotic perennial cover - grasses (50 m transect); ECO: exotic cover- ‘other’ (50 m transect); LXW: level X weeds (50 m transect); L: litter (50 m transect); R: rock (50 m transect); BG: bare ground (50 m transect); C: cryptogram (50 mtransect). These results highlight the influence that stochastic events can have as drivers of change within ecosystems: such as the role of variable seasonal weather patterns in influencing the emergence, growth and proliferation of pest plants. Despite persistent weed control programs, highly invasive weeds will germinate and proliferate during favourable conditions (for that species) where legacy seed banks exist. Snapshots of the data must be considered in the context of longer term trends to assess control program effectiveness over time. Treating large ‘flush’ events when conditions drive the germination of key invasive weeds is a crucial action to diminish legacy seed banks, which are common within former agricultural areas. Targeted PCS pest plant treatment programs have followed on from the September 2016 plot monitoring period (see maps of treated pest plant infestations as shown in Appendix C) and will continue through this OMP cycle and beyond, as outlined in section 4. Habitat Improvement Plan (4.1.1 Invasive plants). 5.6.2 Data driven performance targets The key data driven performance target for this 3-year OMP management cycle is to achieve a reduction in the ‘weed score’ and ‘presence of significant weeds’ (Table 10) to 2014 baseline level or below. Weeds of concern identified by the 2016 plot monitoring were African boxthorn (Lycium ferocissimum), St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum), and Chilean needlegrass (Nassella neesiana). PCS land managers will conduct targeted treatment programs. To track interim progress towards the target between box-gum woodland monitoring cycles, land managers will review annual treated weed map and adapt the management programs where necessary to better target the species of concern..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 43 5.6.3 Hoary Sunray A baseline assessment was completed by PCS ecologists in spring 2017. Table 5 shows the location and extent of the 3 Hoary sunray patches identified within the offset site. The patch to the east of the site was surveyed with 8 x 1m x 1m quadrats, resulting in an average density of 10 plants per square metre. The larger patch to the west of the site was surveyed with 7 x 1m x 1m quadrats, resulting in an average density of 22 plants per square metre. The smaller patch to the west of the site was surveyed with 4 x 1m x 1m quadrats, resulting in an average density of 20 plants per square metre. The maintenance of the Hoary Sunray population against 2017 baseline conditions (extent and density) will be assessed every 3 years by PCS staff, or a suitably qualified consultant (as specified in section 5.1). Given that the population of Hoary Sunray at JRHP has been established through human intervention, habitat suitability will be evaluated before further plantings occur if a sustained decline across multiple seasons is observed. Seasonal trends will be also be considered when analysing the population data to account for potential climatic drivers of change. The greatest identified threat to maintaining the quality and extent of Hoary Sunray is the presence of invasive weeds with JRHP. A decline in the cover of weed species (as indicated by invasive weed monitoring and the Box Gum Woodland monitoring programs), will also be used as a performance measure for this species in accordance with management action 4.1 from the National Recovery Plan for the Hoary Sunray Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor [Sinclair 2010]. Monitoring results will underpin continual improvement of restoration techniques under an adaptive framework, and will be documented as part of annual reporting. Accurate records will be kept for all activities to ensure reporting and monitoring requirements are met. The results of the monitoring program will also be disseminated within the ACT Government to better inform the management of this species within the ACT. 5.7 Limitations and uncertainties Known limitations and uncertainties are present in the utilised monitoring methodology. These include: Seasonal variation: Whilst it is specified that monitoring takes place during the optimal period for species detection, seasonal conditions vary from year to year that will impact on the results. For example, wet conditions in winter and early spring will results in a high proportion of exotic annual grasses and weeds being present, which can influence opinion on native cover or conceal native species. Overly dry conditions in winter and early spring can result in very low germination of native forbs, reducing species diversity measures. Seasonality impacts also include delay or early onset of flowering of forbs. If this is not detected, it can result in reduced species diversity measures or insufficient diagnostic material to accurately identify plants. Seasonal variation between surveys can be prevented as much as practicable by ensuring that the personnel engaged for monitoring are highly experienced in vegetation monitoring and local conditions, so that changes in flowering time or exotic cover can be predicted and survey methods adjusted to accommodate the change in conditions. Dry seasons, with low forb presence, are unavoidable, and must be considered in reporting and comparisons with baseline data. Observer bias: Differing surveyors between monitoring events, can result in different results, including underestimation of species diversity and different cover measurements i.e. canopy cover, native grass cover, shrub cover. This can be prevented as much as practicable by ensuring that the surveyors engaged for monitoring events are highly experienced in plant identification and vegetation community composition. Indication of increase/decrease in quality: Uncertainties occur around the amount of change required to accurately indicate an increase or decrease in quality of a site, rather than just seasonal variation. Any significant changes noted between monitoring events will be investigated in collaboration with ACT Government ecologists to determine the causes, and will require an inspection of monitoring data from numerous sites in the ACT to look for wider patterns to determine if changes indicate seasonal variation or site specific change in condition. Keeping the timing of woodland monitoring consistent across all offset sites in the ACT will provide a broad scale record of woodland condition in lowland ACT within that particular year, and will assist in determining if the vegetation condition is changing, or due to seasonal effects..
44 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 45 6. MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN 6.1 Planning Activity Description Responsibility Estimated Completion Timeframe Estimated# Budget 2016-17 to 2017-18 Estimated# Ongoing Operational Costs (p.a.) Activities Declaration Prepare an Activities Declaration for the Justice Robert Hope Park Nature Reserve pursuant to the ACT NC Act 2014. PCS 2018-19 - - Consult with ACT Heritage Unit Inform the ACT Heritage Unit of operational or habitat restoration works which could impact potential cultural heritage sites within the offset sites. PCS Ongoing - - Cultural heritage assessment reporting and management requirements Section 4.5 » » Follow the guidelines outlined in the Cultural Heritage Reporting Policy (ACT Heritage Council 2015). This document details the cultural assessment and reporting requirements for projects that could impact on places or objects with indigenous or historic heritage value. » » Any discovery of an Aboriginal place or object will be reported to the Heritage Council within five working days. PCS Ongoing - - Utility notifications Section 4.8 » » Follow the procedures required when planning works within the vicinity of utility infrastructure. » » Adhere to the Code of Practice between PCS and ActewAGL [ERM 2009]. PCS Ongoing - - Offset Management Plan review Section 11 The Plan will be reviewed and updated within six (6) months of the submission to the ACT Government of consultant reports prepared as part of the 2020 Box Gum Woodland monitoring program (Section 5.1). The reviewed plan will be submitted to the Commonwealth Department of the Environment for approval. Until the revised plan is approved, the offset site will be managed in accordance with the Plan. PCS Six (6) months from completion of 2020 BGW monitoring report - -.
46 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 6.2 Capital improvement works (and associated planning) Activity Description Responsibility Estimated Completion Timeframe Estimated# Budget 2016-17 to 2018-19 Estimated# Ongoing Operational Costs (p.a.) Fencing Section 4.3.1 » » Replace offset boundary fences and gates » » Remove internal fencing. » » New fences to be installed using wildlife friendly specifications including kangaroo access gates. PCS 2018-19 (completed 2017) $40,000 $2000 Tracks and Trails Section 4.8.2 » » Construct new formed visitor discovery trail with track markers. PCS 2019-20 $60,000 $4000 » » Establish and maintain slashed management tracks Ongoing. - - Visitor infrastructure Section 4.3.3 » » Install large reserve signage and small “Dogs on leash” signs. PCS 2018-19 $9000 $500 » » Replace existing interpretation signs. 2019-20 $15,000 $500.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 47 6.3 Environmental enhancement and operational works Activity Description Responsibility Estimated Completion Timeframe Estimated# Budget 2016-17 to 2018-19 Estimated# Ongoing Operational Costs (p.a.) Waste Section 4.3.4 Waste will be removed from the offset site including old fencing materials and general litter. PCS Ongoing - - Weed control Section 4.1.1 » » Target key weeds that are of a statutory obligation for control: » » African Lovegrass » » Woody weeds » » Chilean Needlegrass » » Paterson’s Curse » » Scotch Thistle » » Serrated Tussock » » St John’s Wort » » Spot spraying is the preferred method of control in conjunction with slashing in areas of dense weed infestations. » » All weed control efforts to be mapped and reviewed annually to monitor effectiveness of weed control program. PCS to engage suitably qualified contractors, and the WWWG as appropriate. Annually $10,000 p.a. $10,000 Invasive animals Section 4.1.2 » » Control rabbits in line with ACT Pest Management Strategy » » Coordinate the above activities with those in the Mount Majura Nature Reserve if practicable PCS Annually - - Revegetation Section 4.2.3 » » Native grass seed to be used for revegetation as appropriate » » Shrubs characteristic of Box Gum Woodland communities are to be planted to the higher benchmark within the offset site to improve bird habitat. » » Revegetate around the storm water settling pond with aquatic plants to maintain frog habitat. » » Temporary fencing or guards to be erected around revegetation to protect from grazing. PCS and WWWG 2016-17 (completed) 2018-19 $12,000 p.a. $8,000 Woody debris relocation Section 4.7 » » If available, woody debris will be sourced from the Development site and placed appropriately in consultation with the WWWG PCS, WWWG and developers 2016-17 (completed) $5000 - Increasing habitat for hollow nesting animals Investigate options to increase the nesting habitat for birds and arboreal mammals. 2018-19 $5,000 -.
48 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 6.4 Monitoring program and review Proposed Activity Description of Proposed Works Responsibility Estimated Completion Timeframe Estimated# Budget 2016-17 to 2018-19 Estimated# Ongoing Operational Costs (p.a.) Water Quality and Frog Habitat Section 4.2.6 » » Water quality testing will be completed monthly using waterwatch guidelines. » » Frog populations within the offset site will be monitored annually in accordance with the Frogwatch Census method. PCS and WWWG Annually - - Box Gum Woodland mapping Section 5.1 Engage a suitably qualified expert to map the extent and condition of Box Gum Woodland within the reserve. PCS to engage a suitably qualified expert 2017 (complete), 2027 and 2033 $4,000 $4,000 per mapping event Box-Gum Woodlands monitoring Section 5.1 Engage a suitably qualified expert to undertake monitoring of existing plots within the Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands community (as described in Table 9) PCS Ecologists to review monitoring data to identify any changes occurring over time within the Box-Gum Woodland community. PCS to engage a suitably qualified expert 2017 (complete), 2018, 2019, 2020, 2023, 2026, 2029 and 2032 $10,000 $38,000 for 2020, 2023 and 2026 combined Hoary Sunray monitoring Section 5.1 PCS staff to establish baseline data and undertake monitoring of the Hoary Sunray population. PCS staff will map the extent of Hoary Sunray populations within the offset site at each monitoring event to ensure change over time in extent of the population can be assessed. PCS staff 2017 (complete), 2020, 2023, 2026, 2029 and 2032 $500 - Photo monitoring Section 5.6 To be undertaken as part of the Box Gum Woodland monitoring. PCS to engage a suitably qualified expert 2016 (complete), 2018, 2019, 2020, 2023, 2026, 2029 and 2032 - -.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 49 6.5 Management resources Proposed Activity Description of Proposed Works Responsibility Estimated Completion Timeframe Estimated# Budget 2016-17 to 2018-19 Estimated# Ongoing Operational Costs (p.a.) Staffing To deliver the actions outlined in this, plan resources to support a part-time Senior Ranger (Ranger Grade 3) position and vehicle PCS On-going $148,000 $55,000 Training All personnel, including contractors, involved in managing the offset site must be trained in the requirements and appropriate management of Box-Gum Woodlands. PCS and CR As needed - - #The estimated costs and timeframes required to deliver on the proposed works are based on current information from experienced PCS staff and external service providers who manage reserves with similar land management issues and requirements. Some variation to these estimates could occur due to factors such as external environmental influences (e.g. climate, pest plant and animal population dynamics etc.), increased material costs, increased contractor costs, contractor availability etc. Note: items without allocated funds will be delivered using PCS staff or funded as part of other actions identified in this plan..
50 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 51 7. ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT Adaptive management is a systematic process for continually improving management practices through learning from the outcomes of previous management (Umwelt 2014). A strong feedback loop between monitoring and management will be established. This will enable a flexible approach to the management requirements of the site, allowing ongoing feedback and refinement of the management strategy to achieve offset approval conditions. Adaptive management of the offset site will comprise of adapting conservation and land management actions in response to: » » legislative change » » any unforeseen or unplanned management threats; » » advances in research and land management techniques » » ecological data from the monitoring program As discussed in section 5.6, if the analysis of comparable monitoring data indicates a decline in one or more MNES condition attributes below baseline thresholds (see Tables 10 and 11), PCS planners will: 1. establish specific data driven performance targets within the next 3-year Offset Management Plan 2. revise and implement related management actions to address the decline, with the aim of the MNES condition to increase back to baseline level. ‘Revising management actions’ must involve evaluating the current land management approach and adapting based on the following options: » » Improve knowledge of the issue (e.g. more detailed pest plant and animal infestation mapping) » » Conduct wider consultation on management practices (e.g. ACT Government ecologists, PCS Vertebrate Pest Officer, PCS Weeds Officer, external knowledge holders, field manuals and relevant strategic plans - see Table 1) » » Brief and involve community partners in management » » Advocate for an increase in management resources » » Alter the timing of management actions » » Increase the frequency of management actions » » Alter the treatment methods » » Address external drivers (e.g. adjacent infestation sources) » » Select an alternate contractor » » Improve evaluations and maintenance of delivered actions » » Conduct consistent GIS mapping of management to track interventions/treatment programs and provide interim progress feedback to land managers between 3-year monitoring cycles. As a long-term monitoring data set builds over time, snapshots of the data must be considered in the context of longer-term trends and seasonal variability when planning management responses. Any changes to the management of the offset site outside the scope of what is considered as adaptive management will be presented to the Department of the Environment for approval prior to implementation..
52 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 8 RECORD MANAGEMENT PCS will maintain accurate records substantiating any activities associated with or relevant to the conditions of approval, including measures taken to implement the Plan. Any activities undertaken by Watson Woodlands Working Group will also be recorded and provided to PCS staff to assist with monitoring and reporting. 9 REPORTING 9.1 Standard reporting schedule The ACT Government, Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD), is responsible for submitting an annual report to the Australian Government, Department of Environment and Energy by the 30th August each year. This report will be published on the ACT Government environmental offsets register (EPSDD webpage). Documentary evidence providing proof of the date of publication and any non-compliance of any of the conditions within the approval decision will be submitted to the Commonwealth at the same time as the report is published. The reporting will demonstrate how the Suburban Land Agency (previously known as the Land Development Agency), Deed Management and the ACT PCS, all within the EPSDD and Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd have complied with the conditions in the approval decision for the development of the Residential development, Block 9 Section 64, Watson, and extension of Negus Crescent (EPBC 2012/6418). Specifically: » » The Deed Management section in EPSDD are responsible for complying with conditions 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d, 1e, 1f, 1g, 1h and 1i » » Lonsdale 28 Pty Ltd are responsible for complying with conditions 2 and 4 » » PCS are responsible for complying with conditions 3a, 3b-i, 3b-ii, 3b-iii, 3b-iv, 3b-v, 3c, and 3d » » All parties are responsible for complying with conditions 5, 6, 7 and 8. » » In addition, this report also demonstrates how PCS has implemented the management plan for the Justice Robert Hope Park offset area on behalf of Suburban Land Agency. 9.2 Reporting of unanticipated or unapproved incidents Unanticipated impacts to MNES will be reported at time of incidence ( or within 2 business days) along with any mitigation or rectification activities. Reporting will include a “lessons learned” summary and a schedule of costs, as well as an overview of any further action required. 10. REVIEW The management actions outlined in the Plan will be reviewed and updated in 2021 and six (6) months after the finalisation of reports prepared as part of the 2020 Box Gum Woodland monitoring program (Section 5.1). After this the plan will be review every 5 years. Any updates will be in response to: » » the outcomes of the monitoring program (Section 5) » » advances in our knowledge of the habitat requirements and life cycle of the MNES and » » any unforeseen or unplanned threats to the conservation values within the offset site. The revised Plan will be developed in consultation with key stakeholders as described in Sections 1.5 and 1.6. The Plan will be updated before this time if a significant event (e.g. bushfire) occurs that requires changes to the Plan. A review will also be undertaken if directed by the Commonwealth Minister for the Department of the Environment..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 53 REFERENCES ACT Government. (2004). Woodlands for wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. Action Plan No. 27. Environment ACT, Canberra. Available at: http:// www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/conservation_and_ ecological_communities/threatened_species_action_ plans (Accessed 24 Feb. 2015). ACT Government. (2005). Information Sheet: Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor) A Vulnerable Species. ACT Government, Canberra. ACT Government. (2012a). ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy 2012-2022. Available at: http://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0008/575117/PAMS_WEB.pdf. (Accessed 17 December 2016). ACT Government. (2012b). ACT Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005. ACT Parliamentary Counsel, Canberra. ACT Government. (2013). ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013-23. Australian Capital Territory, Canberra. ACT Government. (2014a). Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT. Version 3. Emergency Services Agency, Canberra. Available at: http://esa.act. gov.au/community-information/publications/sbmp/ (Accessed 06 Mar. 2015). ACT Government. (2014b). Superb Parrot Habitat Improvement Plan. ACT Government, Canberra. ACT Government. (2015a). Vegetation Benchmarks Database. Available at: http://www.environment.act. gov.au/cpr/environmental-offsets-policy (Accessed 7 December 2016). ACT Government. (2015b). Heritage in the ACT. Available at: http://www.environment.act.gov.au/ heritage/heritage-in-the-act. (Accessed 7 December 2016). ACT Government. (2015c). Monitoring Guidelines for Box – Gum Woodlands. Conservation Research, Canberra ACT Heritage Council. (2015d). Cultural Heritage Reporting Policy. Environment and Planning Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. ACT Government. (2016a). Invasive Weeds Operational Plan 2016-117. Available at: http://www.environment. act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/909933/ Invasive-WeedsOperations-Plan-2016-17.pdf. (Accessed 17 December 2016). ACT Government. (2016b). ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Operational Manual. Environment and Planning, Australian Capital Territory, Canberra. ACT Government. (2017). Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native species Management Plan. Environment, Planning and Sustainability Directorate, Australian Capital Territory, Canberra ACT Government. (2017b). 2017/18 Bushfire Operations Plan. Environment, Planning and Sustainability Directorate, Australian Capital Territory, Canberra ACT Government. (in preparation). Draft Canberra Nature Park Plan of Management. Australian Capital Territory, Canberra. Atlas of Living Australia. (2016). Explore your area. Available at: http://biocache.ala.org.au/explore/ your-area#-35.2334051|149.1613301|14|ALL_SPECIES. (Accessed 21 December 2016). Atlas of Living Australia. (2016a). Miniopterus schreibersii oceanensis. Available at: http://bie.ala. org.au/species/urn:lsid:biodiversity.org.au:afd. taxon:abc00f63-254a-47d9-b1ed-b859a172915c. (Accessed 23 November 2016). Australian Government Bureau of Meteorology. (2017). Annual Climate Summary for Canberra - Product code IDCKGC55L0. Available at: http://www.bom. gov.au/climate/current/annual/act/summary.shtml. [Accessed 15 December 2017]. Australian Weeds Committee. (2016). Weeds of National Significance. [ONLINE] Available at: http://weeds.ala. org.au/WoNS/. (Accessed 23 November 2016). Baker-Gabb, D. (2011). National Recovery Plan for the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii. Department of Sustainability and Environment, Melbourne. Available at: http://www.environment.gov.au/resource/national- recovery-plan-superb-parrot-polytelis-swainsonii (Accessed 24 Feb. 2015.). Banks, J.C.G. (1997). ‘Tree ages and ageing in Yellow Box’, pp. 17-28. In The Coming of Age; Forest Age and Heritage Values, J. Dargavel (Ed.). 1997 Technical Series No. 1, Australian Heritage Commission and Environment Australia, Canberra..
54 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Barrett, T. and Love, J. (2012). DRAFT Fine scale modelling of fauna habitat and connectivity values in the ACT region. Unpublished report by NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, prepared for Conservation Planning and Research, ACT Government, Canberra. Bounds, J., Brookfield, M. & Delahoy, M. (1996). Observations of a breeding colony of four pairs of Regent Honeyeaters at North Watson, Canberra, in 1995–96. Canberra Bird Notes 21(3): 41–55. Available at: http://canberrabirds.org.au/publications/canberra- bird-notes/ (Accessed 24 Feb. 2015). Brereton, R. (1998). Swift Parrot Recovery Plan, 1997- 1999. Parks and Wildlife Service: Hobart. Canberra Ornithologists Group. (n.d.). The Watson woodlands as a woodland habitat. Available at: https://sites.google.com/a/northcanberra.org.au/ watson/Home/woodlands/COGonWatsonWoodlands. pdf?attredirects=0 (Accessed 24 Feb. 2015.). Canberra Indian Myna Action Group. (2006). Canberra Indian Myna Action Group Strategy. Available at: http:// www.indianmynaaction.org.au/documents/CIMAG%20 Strategy.pdf. (Accessed 17 December 2016). Commonwealth of Australia. (2014a). Threat abatement plan for disease in natural ecosystems caused by Phytophthora cinnamomi. Department of the Environment, Canberra. Available at: http:// www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/threatened/ publications/threat-abatement-plan-disease-natural- ecosystems-caused-phytophthora-cinnamomi (Accessed 28 Apr. 2015). Department of the Environment. (2015). Polytelis swainsonii in Species Profile and Threats Database, Department of the Environment, Canberra. Available at: http://www.environment.gov.au/sprat. (Accessed 6 March 2015). Department of the Environment. (2016). National Recovery Plan for the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia). Available at: http://www.environment.gov. au/system/files/resources/286c0b52-815e-4a6c-9d55- 8498c174a057/files/national-recovery-plan-regent- honeyeater.pdf. (Accessed 22 November 2016). Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW. (2011). National Recovery Plan for White Box - Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland. Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW, Sydney. Available at: http://www.environment.gov.au/resource/white-box- yellow-box-blakelys-red-gum-grassy-woodland-and- derived-native-grassland-national (Accessed 24 Feb. 2015). Department of Environment, Climate Change, Energy and Water. (2009). ACT Weeds Strategy 2009- 2019. Available at: http://www.environment.act.gov. au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/575071/ACT-Weeds- Strategy-2009-2019.pdf. (Accessed 23 November 2016). Department of the Environment and Heritage. (2006). White box - yellow box - Blakely’s red gum grassy woodlands and derived native grasslands. Nationally threatened species and ecological communities guidelines. EPBC Act Policy Statement 3.5. Available at: http://www.environment.gov.au/resource/white-box- yellow-box-blakelys-red-gum-grassy-woodlands-and- derived-native-grasslands (Accessed 24 Feb. 2015). Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. (2012). EPBC Act environmental offsets policy. Policy guiding the use of offsets under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). Available at: http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/ publications/epbc-act-environmental-offsets-policy (Accessed 26 Mar. 2015). ERM. (2009). Code of Practice: practical guidelines and standards for co-operation between ACT Parks and Conservation and Lands and ActewAGL. Environmental Resources Management, Canberra. Frogwatch ACT and Region. (2008). National Water Week Community Frogwatch Census Kit. Ginninderra Catchment Group, Canberra. Available at: http:// www.ginninderralandcare.org.au/sites/default/files/ imported/res/File/PDFs/Frogwatch%20Kit/2008%20 Frogwatch%20Kit/Frogwatch%20Census%20Kit%20 2008_PDF.pdf (Accessed 16 February 2016). Gibbons, P., Briggs, S.V., Ayers, D., Seddon, J., Doyle, S.
, Cosier, P., McElhinny, C., Pelly, V. & Roberts, K. (2009) An operational method to assess impacts of land clearing on terrestrial biodiversity. Ecological Indicators. 9: 26 – 40. Gilles, J. (2000). Ecological values of the North Watson Woodlands. A case for preservation. Study commissioned by Watson Community Association Inc., Canberra. Available at: http://www.aph.gov.au/ DocumentStore.ashx?id=6e0b2ece-fa73-45f1-a8ce- 1a2c0278f474&subId=207033 (Accessed 10 Mar. 2015). Higgins, P.J. (Ed.) (1999). Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic Birds. Vol.4 Parrots to Dollarbird. Oxford University Press, Melbourne. Jessop, R. & Moore, D. (2015). Justice Robert Hope Park 2014 Environmental Monitoring Report. Robert Jessop Pty Ltd for the ACT Government, Canberra..
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 55 Kitchin, M. & Matthews, H. (2012).2012–13 Ecological guidelines for fuel and fire management operations. Internal Report 2012/01. ACT Government, Canberra. Larson, R. (2008).History of the Justice Robert Hope Park and the Watson Woodlands Working Group. Available at: http://www.northcanberra.org.au/wp-content/ uploads/2009/01/Woodlands-History1.pdf. (Accessed 17 December 2016). Lawley, V., Lewis, M., Clarke, K. & Ostendorf, B. (2016). Site-based and remote sensing methods for monitoring indicators of vegetation condition: An Australian review. Ecological Indicators. 60: 1273 – 1283. Low, R. (1980). Parrots, their care and breeding. Blandford Press, Poole, UK. Mantle, B. (2008). Community Frogwatch Census Kit. Frogwatch ACT and Region, Canberra. Nash, K., Moore, D. & Hogg, D. McC. (2012). Block 9 Section 64 Watson and Negus Crescent Extension ecological surveys and assessment. Report prepared on behalf of the Land Development Agency. David Hogg Pty Ltd, Canberra. NSW Government. (2011). Operational Manual for BioMetric 3.1. A tool for assessing clearing and ecological thinning proposals on terrestrial biodiversity under the Native Vegetation Act 2003. NSW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water, Sydney. NSW Office of Environment and Heritage. (2016a). Competition and grazing by the feral European Rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus (L.) - profile. Available at: http:// www.environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedSpeciesApp/ profile.aspx?id=20024. (Accessed 28 November 2016). NSW Office of Environment and Heritage. (2016b). Superb Parrot Profile. Available at: http://www. environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedSpeciesApp/ profile.aspx?id=10645. (Accessed 23 November 2016). Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R. & Manning, A. (2016). Technical Report: Breeding Ecology of the superb parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra. ACT Government, Canberra. Rehwinkel, R. (2007). A method to assess grassy ecosystem sites: Using floristic information to assess a site’s quality. NSW Department of Environment and Climate Change, Sydney. Available at: www.gbwcmn.net.au/sites/default/files/ GrasslandAssessmentMethod.pdf (Accessed 10 Mar. 2015). Rehwinkel, R. (2015). Assessing grassland site condition using the Floristic Value Scoring method. Friends of Grasslands forum 30 October – 1 November 2014: Grass half full or grass half empty? Valuing native grassy landscapes. Available online at: http://www.fog. org.au/forum2014.htm (Accessed 28 June 2016). Sinclair, S.J. (2010). National Recovery Plan for the Hoary Sunray Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor. Department of Sustainability and Environment, Melbourne. Available at: http://www.environment.gov. au/resource/national-recovery-plan-hoary-sunray- leucochrysum-albicans-var-tricolor (Accessed 22 Nov. 2016). SMEC (2017). ACT Box – Gum Woodland Offset Monitoring 2016. Report prepared for ACT Parks and Conservation Service. SMEC Australia, Canberra. Waterwatch Australia Steering Committee. (2002). Module 4. Physical and chemical parameters. Environment Australia, Canberra. Waterwatch. (2016). ACT Waterwatch Volunteer Resource Manual. Waterwatch Australian Capital Territory, Canberra. Watson Community Association Inc. (2006). Justice Robert Hope Park. Site Assessment and agreed works plan. Watson Community Association Inc., Canberra. Available at: http://www.northcanberra.org.au/watson- woodlands-working-group-2/ (Accessed 10 Mar. 2015)..
56 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 57 APPENDICES Appendix A. Flora species list in offset site. Scientific Name (*exotic species) Common Name Notes Trees Eucalyptus blakelyi Blakely’s Red Gum Natural and Planted Eucalyptus bridgesiana Apple Box Natural and Planted Celtis triandra* European Nettle Tree Crataegus monogyna* Hawthorn Eucalyptus goniocalyx Bundy Planted Eucalyptus mannifera Brittle Gum Eucalyptus melliodora Yellow Box Natural and Planted Small Trees and Shrubs Acacia dealbata Silver Wattle Planted Acacia genistifolia Spreading Wattle Planted Acacia implexa Hickory Wattle Natural and Planted Acacia parramattensis Parramatta Green Wattle Natural and Planted Acacia rubida Red Stemmed Wattle Planted Bursaria spinosa ssp lasiophylla Australian Blackthorn Planted Cassinia arcuata Sifton Bush Cassinia longifolia Cauliflower Bush Exocarpos cupressiformis Native Cherry Gynatrix pulchella Native Hemp Planted Indigofera adesmiifolia Tick Indigo Planted Indigofera australis Australian Indigo Planted Lycium ferocissimum* African Boxthorn Weed of National Significance Marrubium vulgare* White Horehound Prunus sp.* Ornamental Plum Pyracantha sp.* Firethorn Rosa rubiginosa* Sweet Briar Herbs Acaena ovina Sheep’s Burr Ajuga triandra Austral Bugle Planted Asperula conferta Common Woodruff Bulbine bulbosa Bulbine Lily Planted.
58 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Scientific Name (*exotic species) Common Name Notes Bulbine glauca Rock Bulbine Planted Acetosella vulgaris* Sheep Sorrell Arctotheca calendula* Capeweed Calocephalus citreus Lemon Beauty-heads Natural and Planted Carex inversa Knob Sedge Centaurium erythraea* Common Centuary Cheiranthera cyanea Finger Flowers Planted Chrysocephalum apiculatum Common Everlasting Chrysocephalum semipapposum Clustered Everlasting Natural and Planted Clematis microphylla Small-leaved Clematis Planted Convolvulus angustissimus ssp angustissimus Australian Bindweed Conyza bonariensis* Flaxleaf Fleabane Craspedia variabilis Billy Buttons Planted Cullen microcephalum Dusk Scurf-pea Planted Cynoglossum australe Austral Hounds Tongue Planted Cynoglossum suaveolens Sweet Hounds Tongue Dianella longifolia var longifolia Pale Flax-Lily Considered to be rare in the ACT Dichopogan fimbriatum Nodding Chocolate Lily Planted Dysphania pumilio Small Crumbweed Echium plantagineum* Paterson’s Curse ACT Contained Pest Plant Einadia nutans ssp nutans Climbing Saltbush Erodium cicutarium* Common Storksbill Eryngium ovinum Blue Devil Natural and Planted Euchiton sphaericus Cudweed Geranium solanderi Native Geranium Glycine tabacina Glycine Pea Goodenia pinnatifida Ivy Goodenia Haloragis heterophylla Variable Raspwort Helichrysum luteoalbum Jersey Cudweed Hydrocotyle laxiflora Stinking Pennywort Hypericum gramineum Small St John’s Wort Hypericum perforatum* St John’s Wort Hypochaeris glabra* Flatweed Hypochaeris radicata* Flatweed Juncus triandra Australian Pinrush Juncus usitatus Common Rush.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 59 Scientific Name (*exotic species) Common Name Notes Juncus sp Rush Leptorhynchos squamatus Scaly Button Planted Leucochrysum albicans var tricolor Hoary Sunray EPBC Listed (MNES), Planted Linum marginale Native Flax Planted Lomandra filiformis ssp coriacea Wattle Matrush Lomandra filiformis ssp filiformis Wattle Matrush Lotus triandra Austral-trefoil Planted Microseris lanceolata Yam Daisy Planted Medicago sp* Medic Onopordum acanthium* Scotch Thistle Oreomyrrhis eriopoda Native Carraway Planted Oxalis perennans Native Oxalis Plantago gaudichaudii Narrow Plantain Considered to be rare in the ACT, Planted Plantago lanceolata* Ribwort Plantain Plantago varia Variable Plantain Natural and Planted Podolepis jaceoides Copper-wire Daisy Planted Ranunculus lappaceus Common Buttercups Planted Rumex brownii Swamp Dock Schoenus apogon Fluke Bogrush Solanum nigrum* Black Nightshade Solenogyne dominii Smooth Solenogyne Tragopogon porrifolius* Salsify Tricoryne elatior Yellow Rush Lily Trifolium subterraneum.* Subterranean Clover Triptilodiscus pygmaeus Common Sunray Vittadinia cuneata var cuneata Fuzzweed Planted Vittadinia muelleri Narrow-Leaved New Holland Daisy Planted Wahlenbergia sp Bluebell Wurmbea dioica var dioica Early Nancy Xerochrysum viscosum Sticky Everlasting Natural and Planted Grasses, Rushes and Sedges Aira spp.* Aira Austrostipa bigeniculata Kneed Speargrass Austrostipa scabra ssp falcata Slender Speargrass Avena spp.* Wild Oats Bothriochloa macra Redleg Grass.
60 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Scientific Name (*exotic species) Common Name Notes Bromus diandrus* Great Grass Bromus hordaceus* Soft Grass Bromus sp* Brome Chloris truncata Windmill Grass Cymbopogon refractus Barbed Wire Grass Planted Cynodon dactylon* Couch Grass Cyperus eragrostis* Umbrella Sedge Dactylis glomerata* Cocksfoot Elymus scaber (now Anthosachne scabra) Common Wheatgrass Eragrostis brownii Brown’s Lovegrass Eragrostis curvula* African Love Grass Festuca arundinacea* Tall Fescue Holcus lanatus* Yorkshire Fog Hordeum leporinum* Barley Grass Lolium sp* Ryegrass Microlaena stipoides Weeping Grass Natural and Planted Nassella neesiana* Chilean Needlegrass Weed of National Significance Nassella trichotoma* Serrated Tussock Weed of National Significance Panicum effusum Hairy Panic Paspalum dilatatum* Couch Phalaris aquatica* Phalaris Poa bulbosa* Bulbous Bluegrass Poa sieberiana Snowgrass Natural and Planted Rytidosperma carphoides Short Wallaby Grass Rytidosperma erianthum Hill Wallaby Grass Rytidosperma sp 1 Wallaby Grass Rytidosperma sp 2 Wallaby Grass Sorghum leiocladum Wild Sorghum Planted Sporobolus creber Slender Rats-tail Grass Themeda triandra Kangaroo Grass Natural and Planted Vulpia sp* Rats-tail Fescue Mistletoe Amyema miquelii Box Mistletoe Ferns Cheilanthes austrotenuifolia Rock Fern *Denotes Exotic Animal.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 61 Appendix B. Fauna species list for offset site and adjacent areas Scientific Name Common Name Notes Birds Acanthiza chrysorrhoa Yellow-rumped Thornbill Acanthiza lineata Striated Thornbill Acanthiza nana Yellow Thornbill Acanthiza pusilla Brown Thornbill Acanthiza reguloides Buff-rumped Thornbill Accipiter fasciatus Brown Goshawk Alisterus scapularis Australian King-parrot Anas superciliosa Pacific Black Duck Anthochaera carunculata Red Wattlebird Anthochaera phrygia Regent Honeyeater EPBC Listed (MNES) Ardea pacifica White-necked Heron Cacatua galerita Sulphur-crested Cockatoo Cacatua sanguinea Little Corella Cacomantis flabelliformis Fan-tailed Cuckoo Callocephalon fimbriatum Gang-gang Cockatoo Vulnerable in NSW Chenonetta jubata Australian Wood Duck Chrysococcyx lucidus Shining Bronze-cuckoo Chthonicola sagittata Speckled Warbler Considered to be rare in the ACT Coracina novaehollandiae Black-faced Cuckoo-shrike Corcorax melanorhamphos White-winged Chough Cormobates leucophaeus White-throated Treecreeper Corvus coronoides Australian Raven Cracticus tibicen Australian Magpie Cracticus torquatus Grey Butcherbird Dacelo novaeguineae Laughing Kookaburra Dicaeum hirundinaceum Mistletoebird Eolophus roseicapillus Galah Glossopsitta concinna Musk Lorikeet Grallina cyanoleuca Magpie-lark Hirundo neoxena Welcome Swallow Lathamus discolor Swift Parrot EPBC Listed (MNES) Lichenostomus chrysops Yellow-faced Honeyeater Lichenostomus penicillatus White-plumed Honeyeater Malurus cyaneus Superb Fairy-wren.
62 JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 Scientific Name Common Name Notes Manorina melanocephala Noisy Miner Melithreptus lunatus White-naped Honeyeater Microeca fascinans Jacky Winter Myiagra rubecula Leaden Flycatcher Ocyphaps lophotes Crested Pigeon Oriolus sagittatus Olive-backed Oriole Pachycephala rufiventris Rufous Whistler Pardalotus punctatus Spotted Pardalote Pardalotus striatus Striated Pardalote Passer domesticus* House Sparrow Phaps chalcoptera Common Bronzewing Philemon corniculatus Noisy Friarbird Platycercus elegans Crimson Rosella Platycercus eximius Eastern Rosella Polytelis swainsonii Superb Parrot EPBC Listed (MNES) Psephotus haematonotus Red-rumped Parrot Rhipidura albiscapa Grey Fantail Rhipidura leucophrys Willie Wagtail Rhipidura rufifrons Rufous Fantail Smicrornis brevirostris Weebill Strepera graculina Pied Currawong Sturnus tristis* Indian Myna* Sturnus vulgaris* Common Starling* Todiramphus sanctus Sacred Kingfisher Zosterops lateralis Silvereye Mammals Chalinolobus gouldii Gould’s Wattled Bat Lepus europaeus* European Hare Macropus giganteus Eastern Grey Kangaroo Miniopterus schreibersii ssp oceanis Australiasian Bent-wing Bat Vulnerable in NSW Oryctolagus cuniculus* European wild rabbit Tadarida triandra White-striped Free-Tail Bat Vespadelus regulus Southern Forest Bat Vespadelus vulturnus Little Forest Bat Vulpes vulpes* European Red Fox.
JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 2018–21 63 Scientific Name Common Name Notes Reptiles Pogona barbata Common Bearded Dragon Tiliqua rugosa Shingleback Lizard Tiliqua scincoides Eastern Blue-tongued Lizard Amphibians Crinia parinsignifera Plains Froglet Crinia signifera Common Eastern Froglet Limnodynastes peronii Brown-striped Frog Limnodynastes tasmaniensis Spotted Grass Frog Litoria peronii Peron’s Tree Frog Litoria verreauxii Whistling Tree Frog Neobatrachus sudelli Spotted Burrowing Frog Uperoleia laevigata Smooth Toadlet Invertebrates Heteronympha merope Common Brown Butterfly *Denotes Exotic Animal.
.
National Recovery Plan White Box - Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland A critically endangered ecological community May 2011.
Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW. 2010. National Recovery Plan for White Box - Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland. Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW, Sydney. © Copyright State of NSW and the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW With the exception of the cover photograph, the State of NSW and the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW are pleased to allow this material to be reproduced in whole or in part, provided the meaning is unchanged and its source, publisher and authorship are acknowledged. Disclaimer: This recovery plan sets out the actions necessary to stop the decline of, and support the recovery of, the listed critically endangered ecological community. The Australian Government is committed to action in accordance with the plan and to implementing the plan as it applies to Commonwealth areas. The plan has been developed with the involvement and cooperation of a broad range of stakeholders, including in partnership with the Department of Environment and Resource Management (Qld), the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water (NSW), Department of Sustainability and Environment (Vic) and the Territory and Municipal Services (ACT). The making or adoption of this plan does not necessarily indicate the commitment of individual stakeholders to undertaking any specific actions. The attainment of objectives and the provision of funds may be subject to budgetary and other constraints affecting the parties involved. Proposed actions may be subject to modification over the life of the plan due to changes in knowledge and changes in conservation status. ISBN 978 1 74232 311 4 DECC 2009/407 Front cover photograph: White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland in Barayamal National Park (W. Hawes).
i Acknowledgments The initial draft of this recovery plan was prepared by The Envirofactor Pty Ltd from an original draft prepared by NSW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water. Many thanks to the then National Recovery Team who provided valuable input into the development of the original draft. In addition, this plan has benefited greatly from the generous contributions of Dr Suzanne Prober and Dr Kevin Thiele. Special thanks to them for their continued commitment to, and passion for, the conservation of White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland, for sharing their expertise with land managers, and for their vision in developing the Conservation Management Network model. The Australian Government provided funding to the NSW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water to assist with the preparation of this recovery plan. The maps for the recovery plan were prepared by the Environmental Resources Information Network of the Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities with assistance from the relevant State and Territory agencies. Abbreviations ARG Aboriginal Reference Group ANU Australian National University BGGW Box-Gum Grassy Woodland; White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland CA Conservation Agreement CAP Catchment Action Plan CEN Community Environment Network CMA Catchment Management Authority CMN Conservation Management Network DECCW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water (NSW) DERM Department of Environment and Resource Management (Qld) DEWHA Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts (Cwlth, former) DSE Department of Sustainability and Environment (Vic) DSEWPaC Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities (Cwlth) EPA Environmental Protection Agency (Qld) EPBC Act Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth) ESP Environmental Stewardship Program (Cwlth) EVC Ecological Vegetation Class (Vic) FFG Act Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 (Vic) GA Greening Australia GBW Grassy Box Woodlands IBRA Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources LHPA Livestock Health and Pest Authorities NC Act Nature Conservation Act 1980 (ACT) NC Act(Q) Nature Conservation Act 1992 (Qld) NCT Nature Conservation Trust NCT Act Nature Conservation Trust Act 2001 (NSW) NGO Non-government Organisation NPWS National Parks and Wildlife Service (NSW) NRM Natural Resource Management NV Act Native Vegetation Act 2003 (NSW) PVP Property Vegetation Plan (NSW) RLPB Rural Lands Protection Board (NSW).
ii RTA Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW) TFN (Vic) Trust for Nature (Vic) TSC Act Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 (NSW) TSR Travelling Stock Route/Reserve TSSC Threatened Species Scientific Committee (Cwlth) VM Act Vegetation Management Act 1999 (Qld) WWF World Wide Fund for Nature.
iii TABLE OF CONTENTS Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................... i Abbreviations ...................................................................................................................... i TABLE OF CONTENTS ...................................................................................................... iii Executive Summary ........................................................................................................... 1 PART A: GENERAL INFORMATION .................................................................................. 3 1. Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3 2. Conservation Status .................................................................................................. 4 3. Description of the Listed Ecological Community ................................................... 5 3.1 Structure ............................................................................................................................ 6 3.2 Floristics ............................................................................................................................ 7 3.3 Fauna ................................................................................................................................ 8 4. Past and Present Distribution ................................................................................ 10 4.1 Habitat Critical to the Survival of the Ecological Community .......................................... 12 5. Interests Potentially Affected by the Recovery Plan ............................................. 12 6. Social and Economic Impacts ................................................................................ 13 6.1 Social Impacts ................................................................................................................. 13 6.2 Economic Impacts ........................................................................................................... 13 PART B: THREATS .......................................................................................................... 16 7. Historic and On-going Threats ............................................................................... 16 7.1 Land Use and Management Change .............................................................................. 16 7.2 Conflicting Management Practices ................................................................................. 18 7.3 Degrading Landscape Processes ................................................................................... 21 7.4 Other Potential Threats ................................................................................................... 25 8. Recovery Actions to Date ....................................................................................... 26 8.1 Baseline Information ....................................................................................................... 26 8.2 Protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland ...................................................................... 29 8.3 Community Engagement in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Conservation ........................ 32 8.4 Ecosystem Function and Management Research .......................................................... 36 8.5 Compliance and Regulatory Activities ............................................................................ 43 PART C: RECOVERY PLAN - OBJECTIVES, PERFORMANCE CRITERIA AND ACTIONS .................................................................................................................. 44.
iv 9. Recovery Plan Objectives ....................................................................................... 44 10. Recovery Plan Actions ............................................................................................ 44 11. Performance Criteria ............................................................................................... 45 12. Implementation Schedule ....................................................................................... 45 13. Monitoring, Reporting and Review ......................................................................... 45 PART D: MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ............................................................................ 51 14. Guide for Decision Makers ..................................................................................... 51 14.1 Management Practices Essential to the Maintenance and/or Improvement of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland ........................................................................................... 51 15. References ............................................................................................................... 60 Appendix 1: Important Species for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland ..................................................... 67 Appendix 2: Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Identification Flowchart................................................... 73 Appendix 3: Box-Gum Grassy Woodland State and Transition Model ............................................ 74 Appendix 4: Estimated Distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Remnants ............................... 75 Appendix 5: Full Key/Potentially Threatening Process Listing for Introduced Animal Pest Species 79 Appendix 6: Estimated Extent and Broad Clearing Estimates of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland ....... 80 Appendix 7: Conservation Reserves Known to Contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland .................... 81 Appendix 7: Conservation Reserves Known to Contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland .................... 81 Appendix 8: Remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on the Register of the National Estate ...... 84.
1 Executive Summary This document constitutes the formal National Recovery Plan for White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland (referred to throughout this recovery plan as Box-Gum Grassy Woodland) and as such considers the conservation requirements of the ecological community across its known range. It identifies actions to be undertaken to ensure the long-term viability of the ecological community. White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland is listed as a critically endangered ecological community under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. The ecological community can occur either as woodland or derived native grassland (i.e. grassy woodland where the tree overstorey has been removed). It is characterised by a species-rich understorey of native tussock grasses, herbs and scattered shrubs (where shrub cover comprises less than 30% cover), and a dominance or prior dominance of White Box (Eucalyptus albens) and/or Yellow Box (E. melliodora) and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi) trees. In the Nandewar bioregion, Grey Box (E. microcarpa or E moluccana) may also be dominant or co- dominant. In the woodland state, tree cover is generally discontinuous and of medium height with canopies that are clearly separated. To be considered part of the listed ecological community remnant areas must also:  have a predominantly native understorey (i.e. more than 50% of the perennial vegetative groundlayer must comprise native species), and  be 0.1 hectare (ha) or greater in size and contain 12 or more native understorey species (excluding grasses), including one or more identified important species (see Appendix 1); or be 2 ha or greater in size and have either natural regeneration of the overstorey species or an average of 20 or more mature trees per ha. Box-Gum Grassy Woodland occurs along the western slopes and tablelands of the Great Dividing Range from southern Queensland through New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory to Victoria. The ecological community once covered several million hectares in the eastern part of the wheat-sheep belt and tablelands and some coastal regions (e.g. Bega Valley of NSW). Due to the ecological community’s occurrence on fertile soils it has been extensively cleared for agriculture and intact remnants, including both trees and unmodified understorey, are now extremely rare. Very few high quality remnants remain anywhere across its former range. Current estimates indicate that only 405,000 ha of the ecological community in various condition states remain (Australian Government 2007). Clearing and fragmentation for urban, rural residential, agricultural and infrastructure development remain on-going threats to this ecological community, while degradation resulting from inappropriate management and weed invasion by introduced perennial grasses continues to erode the conservation value of remnant areas. The objective of this recovery plan is to promote the recovery and minimise the risk of extinction of the ecological community through:  achieving no net loss in extent and condition of the ecological community throughout its geographic distribution;  increasing protection of sites in good condition;  increasing landscape function of the ecological community through management and restoration of degraded sites;  increasing transitional areas around remnants and linkages between remnants; and.
2  bringing about enduring changes in participating land manager attitudes and behaviours towards environmental protection and sustainable land management practices to increase extent, integrity and function of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. This recovery plan will be implemented over a five-year period potentially using funding from the Australian Government and resources provided by state, territory and local government bodies, with the assistance of non-government/community organisations and private landholders..
3 PART A: GENERAL INFORMATION 1. Introduction This National Recovery Plan for White Box–Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland (subsequently referred to throughout this plan as “Box-Gum Grassy Woodland”) has been prepared under the provisions of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). In developing this recovery plan consideration has been given to the objects of the EPBC Act as set out in Section 3(1) of the Act and developed in accordance with the requirements specified in Section 271 of the EPBC Act and in Regulation 7.12 of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Regulation 2000 (EPBC Regulation). Box–Gum Grassy Woodland is an ecological community that occurs along the western slopes and tablelands of the Great Dividing Range from southern Queensland through NSW and the ACT to central Victoria (Beadle 1981). Further investigation is required regarding the existence of the listed community in South Australia. It occurs in the following bioregions of the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation of Australia (IBRA): Brigalow Belt South, Murray Darling Depression, Nandewar, New England Tableland, NSW North Coast, NSW South Western Slopes, Sydney Basin, South East Coastal Plain, South East Corner, South Eastern Highlands, South Eastern Queensland, Riverina and Victorian Midlands. The overall aim of this recovery plan is to promote the recovery and prevent the extinction of the critically endangered ecological community, known as Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. The specific objective to be achieved within the life-span of this recovery plan is to minimise the risk of extinction of the ecological community through:  achieving no net loss in extent and condition of the ecological community throughout its geographic distribution;  increasing protection of sites in good condition;  increasing landscape function of the community through management and restoration of degraded sites;  increasing transitional areas around remnants and linkages between remnants; and  bringing about enduring changes in participating land manager attitudes and behaviours towards environmental protection and sustainable land management practices to increase extent, integrity and function of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. This objective will be achieved across the geographic distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and within five years of the adoption of this recovery plan. This recovery plan provides the basis for a strategic, regional and local community-based approach to conserving this ecological community and its threatened component species. It addresses the issues that currently threaten the ecological community and seeks to achieve conservation of the ecological community through implementation of recovery actions. It builds upon, and is consistent with, information in other state and territory recovery and action plans, and priority actions for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and threatened species associated with the ecological community. It is also consistent with management plans for conservation reserves that exist under state and territory legislation..
4 2. Conservation Status Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is listed as a “critically endangered” ecological community under the EPBC Act. The Commonwealth Threatened Species Scientific Committee (TSSC) has deemed the ecological community eligible for listing as critically endangered as it meets the following criteria:  A very severe decline in geographic distribution; and  A reduction in ecological community integrity across most of its geographic distribution. The estimated loss of more than 90% of its pre-European distribution has in turn lead to a critical loss of integrity (structure, composition and ecological processes) (TSSC 2006). The result is that less than half of the remaining 10% is considered likely to meet the minimum condition criteria of the listed ecological community (TSSC 2006). Australian Capital Territory: Yellow Box-Red Gum Grassy Woodland, a component of this ecological community, is listed as endangered under the Nature Conservation Act 1980 (NC Act). New South Wales: White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland is listed as an endangered ecological community under the Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 (TSC Act). This listing also recognises derived native grasslands as part of this ecological community. Other tree species listed under the EPBC Act that may occur in association with this ecological community such as Fuzzy Box (Eucalyptus conica) and Grey Box (E. microcarpa) are listed under the TSC Act (in areas where they dominate) as separate threatened ecological communities. Queensland: The ecological community is a component of a number of Regional Ecosystems (ecological communities assigned a conservation status based on its current remnant extent in a bioregion) listed under the Vegetation Management Act 1999 (VM Act) as endangered. These include: 13.3.1, 13.3.4, 13.12.8 and 13.12.9. It is also a component of Regional Ecosystems 13.11.8 and 12.8.16 listed as “of concern”. Victoria: This ecological community is not listed as threatened under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1998 (FFG Act). However, the ecological community broadly equates to the Ecological Vegetation Classes (EVC) in the following table: Bioregion Ecological Vegetation Class Bioregion conservation status* Central Victorian Uplands 47: Valley Grassy Forest 175_62: Granitic Grassy Woodland 175_61: Grassy Woodland Vulnerable Endangered Endangered Dundas Tablelands 67: Alluvial Terraces Herb-rich Woodland 175: Grassy Woodland Endangered Endangered East Gippsland Lowlands 175_61: Rainshadow Grassy Woodland 175_62: Limestone Grassy Woodland Depleted Depleted East Gippsland Uplands 175_61: Rainshadow Grassy Woodland 175_62: Limestone Grassy Woodland Depleted Depleted Goldfields 47: Valley Grassy Forest 67: Alluvial Terraces Herb-rich Woodland 70:Hillcrest Herb-rich Woodland 175_61: Low Rises Grassy Woodland 175_62: Granitic Grassy Woodland Vulnerable Endangered Depleted Vulnerable Vulnerable Greater Grampiams 67: Alluvial Terraces Herb-rich Woodland 175: Grassy Woodland Least Concern Endangered Highlands Northern Fall 175: Grassy Woodland Depleted Highlands Southland Fall 175: Grassy Woodland Depleted Murray Fans 175: Grassy Woodland Endangered Northern Inland Slopes 47: Valley Grassy Forest 67: Alluvial Terraces Herb-rich Woodland 175_61: Low Rises Grassy Woodland 175_62: Rainshadow Grassy Woodland 175_63: Shrubby Granitic-outwash Grassy Woodland Endangered Endangered Endangered Endangered Endangered.
5 187: Plains Grassy Woodland/Grassy Woodland Complex Endangered Otway Plain 175: Grassy Woodland Endangered Victorian Riverina 47: Grassy Valley Forest 67: Alluvial Terraces Herb-rich Woodland 175_61: Low Rises Grassy Woodland 175_62: Shrubby Granitic-outwash Grassy Woodland Vulnerable Vulnerable Endangered Endangered * Status: DSE (1996-2009) It can also be a component of the following EVCs. Bioregion Ecological Vegetation Class Bioregion conservation status* Dundas Tablelands 55: Plains Grassy Woodland 71: Hills Herb-rich Woodland 704: Lateritic Woodland 882:Shallow Sands Woodland Endangered Vulnerable Depleted Vulnerable Goldfields 3: Damp Sands Herb-rich Woodland 22: Grassy Dry Forest 55: Plains Grassy Woodland Endangered Vulnerable Endangered Greater Grampians 22: Grassy Dry Forest 195: Seasonally Inundated Shrubby Woodland 282: Shrubby Woodlands 283: Plains Sedge Woodland 704: Lateritic Woodland Depleted Least Concern Least Concern Vulnerable Depleted Highlands Northern Fall 47: Valley Grassy Forest 55: Plains Grassy Woodland Vulnerable Endangered Northern Inland Slopes 55: Plains Grassy Woodland 188: Plain Grassy Woodland/Valley Grassy Forest Complex Endangered Endangered Victorian Riverina 55_61: Plains Grassy Woodland 55_62: Riverina Plains Grassy Woodland 187: Plains Grassy Woodland/Grassy Woodland Complex 188: Plains Grassy Woodland/Valley Grassy Forest Complex Endangered Endangered Endangered Endangered Wimmera 3: Damp Sands Herb-rich Woodland 195: Seasonally Inundated Shrubby Woodland 283: Plain Sedge Woodland 803:Plains Woodland Vulnerable Least Concern Depleted Endangered * DSE (1996-2009) A number of species for which Box-Gum Grassy Woodland provides habitat are subject to international, national or state conservation agreements and legislation (see Table 1). Actions outlined in this plan to improve the long-term viability of this ecological community can also be expected to improve conservation outcomes for these species. The EPBC Act regulates actions that may result in significant impact on this listed ecological community, such as clearing trees or understorey vegetation in or next to the community, inappropriate grazing and burning regimes, introduction of potentially invasive pasture species, firewood collection and use of chemical fertilisers in patches which increase the nutrient levels. Any such action that is likely to have a significant impact on the ecological community must be referred to the Australian Government Minister for the Environment and may need to undergo an environmental assessment and approval process. In addition, there are other EPBC-listed ecological communities that intergrade with and/or are adjacent to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, including Grassy Eucalypt Woodland of the Victorian Volcanic Plain, Grey Box (Eucalyptus microcarpa) Grassy Woodlands and Derived Native Grasslands of South-eastern Australia, Natural Temperate Grassland of the Southern Tablelands of NSW and the ACT and Weeping Myall Woodlands. 3. Description of the Listed Ecological Community The listed ecological community can occur either as woodland or derived grassland (i.e. a grassy woodland where the tree overstorey has been removed) (DEH 2006) and provides.
6 important habitat for a suite of woodland animals including marsupials, reptiles, amphibians, birds and invertebrates. White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland listed under the EPBC Act is defined as follows: The ecological community must be, or have previously been, dominated or co-dominated by one or more of the following overstorey species (or hybrids of these species with any other Eucalyptus species): White Box (Eucalyptus albens), Yellow Box (E. melliodora) or Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi) [or Western Grey Box (E. microcarpa) or Coastal Grey Box (E. moluccana) in the Nandewar bioregion]. It must have a predominately native understorey (i.e. more than 50% of the perennial vegetative groundlayer must comprise native species). The area covered by the ecological community (i.e. the patch size) must be greater that 0.1 hectares (ha) and contain 12 or more native understorey species (excluding grasses), including one or more important species (as listed in Appendix 1). If the groundlayer does not meet this last criterion (i.e. does not contain 12 or more native forb species and one or more important species) then the patch size must be 2 ha or greater in area and have an average of 20 or more mature trees per ha, or natural regeneration of the identified dominant overstorey eucalypts (DEH 2006). These minimum condition criteria are displayed diagrammatically in Appendix 2 to assist in identification. Areas which do not meet the criteria are not considered to be part of the listed ecological community. In addition, communities with a continuous shrub layer of more than 30% cover are excluded from the listed ecological community, as they are considered to be shrubby woodland and do not constitute Box-Gum Grassy Woodland (DEH 2006). Areas which are degraded to the extent they are excluded from the community definition may still retain important components of the ecological community (e.g. seed bank, soil biota) and/or provide important habitat for fauna (fallen logs, tree hollows, native grasses, paddock trees, bush rocks, rocky outcrops). Consequently, the restoration and management of these degraded areas is important for the successful recovery of the ecological community. This objective to move Box-Gum Grassy Woodland from lower to higher condition states through changed management is best illustrated in the State and Transition Model in Appendix 3. It is important to note that areas excluded from the community definition above may still meet the definitions of related communities listed under the Acts of other jurisdictions. For example, the NSW listed EEC White Box – Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland is broader in definition than the nationally listed EEC and so may protect areas that are not classified as the listed community at the national level. 3.1 Structure This ecological community can exist in a number of structural forms as a consequence of modification by human activity. In its unmodified form this ecological community is woodland; that is the crowns of the overstorey trees are clearly separated with a canopy cover between 20-50% (Walker and Hopkins 1990, Yates and Hobbs 1997, McIntyre et al. 2002). Underlying this open tree cover is a characteristically dense groundlayer of native grasses and forbs1. Shrubs can be a natural component of grassy woodlands, forming an important component of the ecological community. Shrubs may be present with a generally sparse or patchy distribution but may become dominant over a localised area (TSSC 2006; Prober and Thiele 2004). On poorer soils the Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands grades into shrubby woodlands (Prober & Thiele 1993). Over much of its former range, modification as a result of clearing and grazing has resulted 1 Non-woody plants that are not grasses..
7 in either a much reduced tree cover producing open woodlands or isolated trees (with a canopy cover of less than 20%) or removal of the overstorey trees altogether creating derived native grasslands. Alternatively the overstorey remains but the native grassy groundlayer has been removed and/or modified by pasture improvement, such that the groundlayer is now dominated by exotic species (McIntyre et al. 2002). Areas where the groundlayer is dominated by exotic species do not comprise part of the listed ecological community but, as discussed above, may still retain important community components (e.g. soil biota, tree hollows). Consequently the restoration and management of these areas will be addressed as part of this recovery plan. 3.2 Floristics Within this ecological community the overstorey is, or was previously, dominated (or co- dominated) by White Box and/or Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum. In the Nandewar bioregion areas dominated or co-dominated by Coastal Grey Box and/or Western Grey Box also comprise part of the listed ecological community. These dominant species may include hybrids with any other Eucalyptus species. Other co-dominant or associated tree species may include: Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata), Kurrajong (Brachychiton populneus), Black Cypress Pine (Callitris endlicheri), White Cypress Pine (C. glaucophylla), Apple Box (Eucalyptus bridgesiana), Argyle Apple (E. cinerea), New England Stringybark (E. caliginosa), Fuzzy Box (E. conica), Long-leaved Box (E. goniocalyx), Red Stringybark (E. macrorhyncha), Brittle Gum (E. mannifera), Western Grey Box (E. microcarpa), Coastal Grey Box (E. moluccana), Red Box (E. polyanthemos) and Candlebark (E. rubida) (Beadle 1981; Austin et al. 2002; DEC 2005). Hybridisation is a natural occurrence common in Eucalyptus species, and hybrids of some eucalypt species may be present in the canopy layer. Due to the wide geographic distribution of this ecological community, the species composition of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland understorey varies in response to changes in climate from north to south (Prober 1996). This notwithstanding, in relatively intact stands the groundlayer is usually characterised by open swards of Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra, known in NSW as T. australis), Snow Grass (Poa sieberiana) and/or River Tussock (P. labillardieri). This sward is interspersed with a diversity of forbs and other grasses including; Wiregrasses (Aristida spp.), Vanilla Lilies (Arthropodium spp.), Common Woodruff (Asperula conferta), Wallaby Grasses (Austrodanthonia spp.), Speargrasses (Austrostipa spp.), Weeping Grass (Microlaena stipoides), Bulbine Lily (Bulbine bulbosa), Redgrasses (Bothriochloa spp.), Tick-trefoils (Desmodium brachypodum and D. varians), Bluegrasses (Dichanthium spp.), Rock Fern (Cheilanthes sieberi ssp. sieberi), Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum), Flax Lilies (Dianella spp.), Nodding Chocolate Lily (Dichopogon fimbriatus), Common Wheat Grass (Elymus scaber), Native Geraniums (Geranium retrorsum and G. solanderi), Native Soyas (Glycine clandestina and G. tabacina), Scrambled Eggs (Goodenia pinnatifida), Small St John’s Wort (Hypericum gramineum), Red-anthered Wallaby Grass (Joycea pallida), Scaly Buttons (Leptorhynchos squamatus), Native Flax (Linum marginale), Mat-rushes (Lomandra spp.), Yam Daisy (Microseris lanceolata), Grassland Wood Sorrel (Oxalis perennans), Native Sorghum (Sorghum leiocladum) and Creamy Candles (Stackhousia monogyna) (Keith 2004; DEC 2005). Prober and Thiele (2004) studied the east-west patterns in box-gum woodland understorey. They found changes in the understorey composition from the Tablelands in the east to the Plains in the west where Grey and Bimble Box dominate the overstorey.
 They concluded that both climatic and lithological factors were important..
8 As Box-Gum Grassy Woodland becomes degraded the dominance of Kangaroo Grass and Poa species declines and other native grasses such as Austrodanthonia spp., Austrostipa spp. and Bothriochloa spp. become dominant (Moore 1953a). With further degradation, native grasses are replaced by annual and perennial exotic species. While a number of native forb species can withstand and/or benefit from some disturbance, a suite of native forbs are lost early in this degradation sequence and only a few survive in the most highly degraded remnants (Moore 1953a, 1953b; Moore 1970; Prober and Thiele 1995). A sparse shrub layer comprising wattles (Acacia spp.), Native Blackthorn (Bursaria spinosa), Native Olive (Notelaea microcarpa) and pea shrubs such as Eutaxia, Dillwynia and Templetonia may be present. 3.3 Fauna Integral to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is the suite of fauna dependent upon the habitat provided by this ecological community for foraging, roosting, nesting, raising young, dispersal, movement and/or migration. These include birds, arboreal and ground-dwelling mammals, reptiles, amphibians and invertebrates. Many of these fauna species may also use other vegetation types (e.g. forests and shrubby woodlands) for one or more of these activities, but some are almost exclusively dependent upon grassy woodland and/or native grasslands, for example the Five-clawed Worm Skink (Anomalopus mackayi) and the Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar). Fauna species are inextricably linked to a functioning woodland/grassland ecosystem. The ecosystem is a source of food and habitat for fauna, while ecosystem services provided by fauna include: plant pollination, seed dispersal, nutrient recycling, maintenance of soil structure, control of herbivorous insects and provision of disturbance which assists in maintaining floristic diversity (ACT Government 2004). The decline and fragmentation of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland vegetative components has led, not unexpectedly, to a similar decline in their associated fauna assemblages. This decline results not only from the death of individuals and habitat loss as a consequence of clearing (i.e. animals have less area in which to live), but also from habitat fragmentation. Fragmented habitat can make it difficult, if not impossible, for many species to migrate, disperse and/or exchange genetic material across the landscape. It also increases competition (inter and intra-species) for remaining resources and the risk of predation. Nectar, an important food resource for fauna, is more abundant on the fertile soils on which Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands are found. Mac Nally et al. (2009) attributed collapses in bird populations at a regional scale to lower breeding success due to reduced food, particularly through loss of habitat quality of wooded vegetation. TABLE 1: Threatened species and ecological communities that may occur in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland listed under Commonwealth, State and Territory legislation and/or on IUCN Red list1. SPECIES COMMON NAME IUCN1 Cwlth2 ACT3 NSW4 Qld5 Vic6 FLORA Acacia atrox Myall Creek Wattle E Acacia omalophylla Yarran Wattle E Ammobium craspedioides Yass Daisy V V Bothriochloa biloba Lobed Redgrass V V V Dichanthium setosum Bluegrass V V NT Digitaria porrecta Finger Panic Grass E E NT Discaria pubescens Australian Anchor Plant NT V Diuris pedunculata Small Snake Orchid E E Diuris punctata var. punctata Purple Diuris V Goodenia macbarronii Narrow Goodenia V V Glycine canescens Silky Glycine E.
9 SPECIES COMMON NAME IUCN1 Cwlth2 ACT3 NSW4 Qld5 Vic6 Hibbertia humifusa subsp. erigens Euroa Guinea-flower V V Homopholis belsonii Belson’s Panic V E Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor Hoary Sunray (white form) E E Picris evae a hawkweed V V V Prasophyllum petilum Tarengo Leek Orchid E E Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides Button Wrinklewort E E E Senecio garlandii Woolly Ragwort V V E Swainsona recta Small Purple Pea E E E E Swainsona sericea Silky Swainson-pea V V Thesium australe Austral Toadflax V V V V FAUNA Anomalopus mackayi Five-clawed Worm-skink V E E Aprasia parapulchella Pink-tailed Worm-lizard V V E Burhinus grallarius Bush Stone-curlew NT E E Climacteris picumnus victoriae Brown Treecreeper (eastern subspecies) V V Chthonicola sagittata Speckled Warbler LC V V Dasyurus maculatus maculatus Spotted-tail Quoll NT E V V V E Delma impar Striped Legless Lizard V V V V E Geophaps scripta Squatter Pigeon LC E V Grantiella picta Painted Honeyeater NT V V V V Hieraaetus morphnoides Little Eagle LC Hoplocephalus bitorquatus Pale-headed Snake V Lathamus discolor Swift Parrot E E V E E E Lophoictinia isura Square-tailed Kite LC V NT V Melanodryas cucullata cucullata Hooded Robin (south-eastern form) LC V V Melithreptus gularis gularis Black-chinned Honeyeater (eastern subspecies) LC V NT Neophema pulchella Turquoise Parrot LC V NT NT Ninox connivens Barking Owl LC V E Paralucia spinifera Bathurst Copper Butterfly E V Pedionomus torquatus Plains Wanderer E V E V Perunga ochracea Perunga Grasshopper V Petaurus norfolcensis Squirrel Glider LC V E Phascogale tapoatafa Brush-tailed Phascogale NT E V Phascolarctos cinereus Koala LC V V Polytelis swainsonii Superb Parrot V V V V E Pomatostomus temporalis temporalis Grey-crowned Babbler (eastern subspecies) LC V E Saccolaimus flaviventris Yellow-bellied Sheathtail-bat LC V Stagonopleura guttata Diamond Firetail NT V V Suta flagellum Little Whip Snake V Synemon plana Golden Sun Moth CE E E E Tympanocryptis pinguicolla Grassland Earless Dragon E E E CE Tyto novaehollandiae Masked Owl LC V E Underwoodisaurus sphyrurus Border Thick-tailed Gecko NT V V NT Varanus rosenbergi Rosenberg’s Goanna V V Xanthomyza phrygia Regent Honeyeater E E E E E CE ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES Aquatic Community of the Natural Drainage System of the Lower Catchment of the Darling River E Temperate Woodland Bird Community E White Box Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland E.
10 Yellow Box-Red Gum Grassy Woodland E Inland Grey Box Woodland E Fuzzy Box Woodland E CE: Critically Endangered; E: Endangered; V: Vulnerable; NT: Near Threatened; LC: Least Concern. 1 IUCN: 2008 Red List of Threatened Species 2 Cwlth: Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 3 ACT: Nature Conservation Act 1980 4 NSW: Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 & Fisheries Management Act 1994 5 Qld: Nature Conservation Act 1992 6 Vic: Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 The impact of these processes on fauna populations is further exacerbated by on-going degradation of the remaining habitat as a result of inappropriate grazing, pasture improvement, timber harvesting, firewood collection, “tidying up”, fire fuel management, regrowth removal and/or weed invasion. The outcome of these activities is the continued loss of habitat elements within remaining patches (native groundlayer, species diversity, fallen timber, hollow trees). As a consequence, many species occurring within Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are now listed as threatened under state and/or Commonwealth legislation, as listed in Table 1. Recovery of the ecological community can be expected to directly benefit the recovery of these species. 4. Past and Present Distribution Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is a geographically widespread but now highly fragmented ecological community, found along the slopes and tablelands of Queensland and NSW, through the ACT to Victoria (Beadle 1981). It occurs in areas with an annual rainfall between 400-800 mm at altitudes of 170-1200 m above sea level (NSW Scientific Committee 2002; TSSC 2006). Prior to European settlement this ecological community formed an almost continuous band comprising several million hectares (Beadle 1981). However, its occurrence on moderate to high fertility soils has resulted in the preferential clearing of large areas of this ecological community for cropping and/or its modification by pasture improvement and grazing (Specht 1981; Benson 1991; Prober and Thiele 1993; Prober and Thiele 2005). Current estimates indicate that only 405,000 ha of the ecological community in various condition states remain (Australian Government 2007). An indicative map showing the estimated distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants is shown in Appendix 4. In Queensland this ecological community occurs within the Brigalow Belt and New England Tablelands bioregions. Regional Ecosystem data indicates that 67% of the pre-European (pre-1750) extent of this ecological community has been cleared (EPA 2003), and the remainder has been modified by grazing (TSSC 2006). Only a small proportion of what remains is considered to meet the minimum condition criteria that defines the listed ecological community..
11 In NSW it is found within the North Coast, New England Tablelands, Nandewar, Brigalow Belt South, Sydney Basin, South Eastern Highlands, South East Corner and South Western Slopes bioregions. In the central and southern half of the state, studies have shown that less than 1% of the pre-1750 extent remains in the Central Lachlan region (Austin et al. 2000), less than 7% in the Holbrook area (Gibbons and Boak 2002), and around 4% within the NSW South Western Slopes and Southern Tablelands bioregions, existing as remnants that have greater than 20% canopy cover, and are 10 ha in size or larger (Thomas et al. 2000). Thomas et al. (2000) also estimate that in south-eastern NSW the extent of White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland has been reduced to around 5% of its pre- 1750 distribution, existing as remnants that have greater than 20% canopy cover, and are 10 ha in size or larger. Further, it is considered that only 0.05% of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in NSW remains in near to original condition (Prober and Thiele 2005). In Victoria this ecological community occurs predominantly within the Northern Inland Slopes as well as the Highlands–Northern Fall, Central Victorian Uplands, Victorian Riverina, Goldfields, Dundas Tablelands, Greater Grampians, Highland–Southern Fall, East Gippsland Lowlands, East Gippsland Uplands, Otway Plains and Murray Fans bioregions and may occur in the Wimmera bioregion. Data from the Ecological Vegetation Classes which may conform with Box-Gum Grassy Woodland indicate that less than 6% of the pre- 1750 extent remains (TSSC 2006). Further analysis is required to determine the reservation status of BGGW but reservation levels of the main constituent EVC, Grassy Woodland, in each bioregion are, on average, below 10% of the pre-European extent (Sue Berwick, pers. comm.). Box-Gum Grassy Woodland also occurs in the ACT which lies predominantly within the South Eastern Highlands bioregion. It is estimated that 32,000 ha of Yellow Box-Red Gum Grassy Woodland existed in the ACT pre-1750, of which 34% now remains in a partially or moderately modified form (ACT Government 2005). A further 5,955 ha contains remnants in a substantially or severely modified condition that at present do not meet the condition criteria for the ecological community. The ecological community may have historically occurred in South Australia but further investigation is required to confirm if the listed community still exists there. Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is one of the more poorly represented ecological communities in the national conservation reserve system (Specht 1981; Yates and Hobbs 1999). Due to its occurrence on high fertility soils, much of the ecological community is on privately owned land, existing as isolated patches within an agricultural matrix of cropping, improved pastures and/or disturbed vegetation communities. The occurrence on predominantly privately owned land also means the spatial distribution and quality of remnants remains largely unknown. While extensive field work will fill some of the information gaps, problems of access (due to private tenure) make it unlikely all remaining occurrences of the listed ecological community will be correctly identified. The difficulty with the identification of areas of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is further exacerbated by on-going clearing and modification. The composition of the characteristic grassy groundlayer within this ecological community is often difficult to identify by remote sensing methods, particularly in variegated landscapes2. Additionally, this stratum can be readily modified and degraded by inappropriate management (e.g. overgrazing, herbicide overspray/drift, heavy application of fertiliser) and/or weed infestation. Consequently, mapping the condition of this ecological community across its geographic range using current technology is problematic, and at best represents a snapshot in time. As so few remnants remain, both little-disturbed and degraded remnants are critical to the survival of this ecological community. Degraded remnants are particularly important as 2 Variegated landscapes are those where modification has largely been through clearing of the overstorey and shrub layers to facilitate grazing of native pastures. In these areas cropping is limited, and derived native grasslands and/or remnant woodland still cover 60-90% of the landscape (McIntyre et al. 2002)..
12 habitat for fauna (including many threatened species and declining woodland birds), for conserving genetic diversity in many woodland species, and for their contribution to landscape values. They also play important roles in landscape-scale resilience and providing opportunities for habitat restoration and integration of conservation and production. 4.1 Habitat Critical to the Survival of the Ecological Community At the time of preparation of this plan, the knowledge and understanding of why particular assemblages of plant and animal species occur on any given site is extremely limited. By its nature, the occurrence and long-term viability of an ecological community is the result of a multitude of environmental factors and a complex array of species’ interactions. It is questionable whether it would ever be possible to define and locate habitat that is critical for a widespread ecological community that is considered critically endangered, precisely because it has been cleared, fragmented and degraded to the point where its medium- and long-term survival is threatened. However, in very broad terms, habitat critical to the survival of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is on the moderate to highly fertile soils of the western slopes of NSW and Queensland, the northern slopes of Victoria, and the tablelands of the Great Dividing Range from southern Queensland through NSW and the ACT. Given the currently highly fragmented and degraded state of this ecological community, all areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland which meet the minimum condition criteria outlined in Section 3 should be considered critical to the survival of this ecological community. In addition, degraded woodland areas not considered part of the listed ecological community may also be essential to the long-term conservation of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, by virtue of their landscape setting (e.g. providing connectivity) or remaining flora/fauna habitat features (e.g. occurrence of rare or threatened species, tree hollows), and should also be considered as potential habitat critical to the survival of this ecological community. The importance of degraded areas to the survival of the listed ecological community should therefore be assessed on a site-by- site basis. To assist the recovery of this ecological community more work is required to identify those areas important for the conservation and maintenance of landscape connectivity, coupled with greater education and incentives for private and public land managers to expand and improve the management of existing remnants. 5. Interests Potentially Affected by the Recovery Plan Box-Gum Grassy Woodland occurs on both public and private land, under a wide range of tenures. Remnants can be found on road, railway and other utility easements, private land, industrial land, travelling stock reserves/routes, town commons, in cemeteries, urban parks, land under Aboriginal title, national parks and nature reserves. Consequently, interest groups are broad-ranging and include Commonwealth, state/territory and local government agencies, private landholders and lessees (including industry), Aboriginal communities, communication networks, research institutions, conservation focuses networks and farm management focussed networks. This recovery plan responds to the requirement of the EPBC Act and as such influences the implementation of planning and development assessment legislation in each state and territory that the ecological community occurs. The recovery plan is consistent with state and territory Recovery and Action Plans for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and will further support the Catchment Action Plans (CAPs) of local Natural Resource Management bodies (NRM)/Catchment Management Authorities (CMAs) and the recovery plans and actions for threatened species associated with this ecological community. The recovery plan intends to recognise the needs and concerns of the range of managers.
13 of land containing Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and to facilitate their involvement in the implementation. The involvement is also aimed at achieving a greater sense of ownership of the process and outcomes, which should assist in the consequential management of sites, encouraging a more sustainable approach to land management in general. 6. Social and Economic Impacts Land on which Box-Gum Grassy Woodland occurs is generally fertile and highly productive and, prior to European settlement, was of great importance to Indigenous communities. It now supports a large proportion of agricultural industries in south-eastern Australia and is important to the economic and social viability of towns and communities across its geographic distribution. 6.1 Social Impacts There will be a number of social impacts from the implementation of the recovery plan. Social benefits generally arise from the maintenance and improvement in the condition of biodiversity in predominantly agricultural landscapes and include:  addressing community concerns regarding the continued loss of biodiversity and possible extinction of an iconic ecological community and its component species, and strengthening community networks;  addressing landholder/farmer concern about weeds and management of remnants;  recognition of the Indigenous cultural values of this ecological community through continuing contact and presence of archaeological sites;  opportunities for tourism and education in regard to the protection and enhancement of this ecological community and its component species; and  maintenance of visual amenity and landscape setting that represents an archetypal Australian rural landscape that visitors expect when enjoying the Australian countryside. The implementation of the recovery plan may have negative social impacts associated with the restriction of rural, residential, agricultural and infrastructure development. Adverse impacts will be minimised through consultation with affected parties. 6.2 Economic Impacts There will be a number of economic impacts from the implementation of the recovery plan. Positive economic benefits stem largely from the protection and enhancement of ecosystems services provided by Box-Gum Grassy Woodland that benefit agriculture, including:  habitat for beneficial native species - woodland birds, bats, predatory insects (which control insect pests) and native insects (for pollination of crops);  maintenance of soil structure, fertility and prevention of erosion;  contribution to the maintenance of water quality;  assisting in the prevention of soil and water salinity;.
14  provision of a carbon sink;  shade and shelter for crops and livestock;  drought resistant, low-input grazing resources;  potential for alternate income streams - nature-based tourism, bush foods;  maintenance of a wild gene pool; and  seed resource base for regeneration. Property prices are also reflecting the increase in value brought by sustainable management practices and retained areas of natural bushland. In recent years there has been an increase in the marketing of bushland properties to attract buyers interested in conservation for “lifestyle”, farmstays or B&B enterprises. Several organisations such as Conservation Brokers in Victoria (www.conservationbroker.net.au) and NSW Nature Conservation Trust (www.naturetrust.org.au) specialise in marketing these types of properties. There is growing recognition within farming communities of the extensive production benefits brought by maintaining biodiversity on-farm. However, the initial outlay costs of changed farming practices, including equipment, fencing and weed management costs, are often prohibitive. Maintaining and improving degraded sites may also reduce the total productive area on farm, and restrict further rural, residential and infrastructural development. While there are many benefits to retaining and managing woodland remnants, conservation of biodiversity, particularly on private land, depends on the behaviour and decisions of the managers of that land. The costs to undertake conservation works include both the financial costs of on-ground works and the foregone rate of return from alternative uses of the land (Aretino et al; 2001). Jenkins (1996) found that farmers are self motivated to undertake conservation works such as replanting and fencing but have limited time and money. Concerns were raised in the Jenkins study by farmers that excessive expenditure on Landcare works could threaten the economic viability of their farms. The vast majority recommended that the government provide financial assistance for undertaking conservations works. A study by Elix and Lambert (1997) of landholders with grassy White Box Woodlands identified the following factors as barriers to conservation: - financial constraints - lack of knowledge and awareness of the value of grassy White Box Woodlands - difficulties in changing already established attitudes to rural management. Many programs are now in place to mitigate the negative financial impacts to individual landholders in recognition that there are broader benefits to society in the management of biodiversity, including Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands. While financial assistance towards on- ground costs such as fencing and weed control has been available since the 1980s it is only recently that compensation for loss of potential income has been available. For example, Greening Australia’s Whole of Paddock Rehabilitation Project3 offers a stewardship payment, to offset loss of production for temporary removal of grazing at approximately 1 Dry Sheep Equivalent or $50/ha/year and the Australian Government’s Stewardship program4 allows for loss of income arising from any restriction of use of areas for production or any other income generating purposes to be included in the bid price. 3 http://www.greeningaustralia.org.au/uploads/Our%20Resources%20-%20pdfs/ACT_WOPR09.pdf 4 http://www.nrm.gov.au/stewardship.
15.
16 PART B: THREATS 7. Historic and On-going Threats The activities and processes which led to the decline in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are still on-going. However, the now highly fragmented, isolated and modified nature of remnants make Box-Gum Grassy Woodland less resilient than ever to these degrading forces. Even those few areas managed within the conservation reserve system are subject to degradation and require active management. Consequently, even with immediate human intervention it will be difficult to reverse these trends (TSSC 2006). The factors which have contributed, and continue to contribute to, the loss of this ecological community are described below. These threats are generally consistent across the geographical distribution of the ecological community. 7.1 Land Use and Management Change Changes in the use and management of land containing Box-Gum Grassy Woodland or land adjacent to the ecological community can have a significant impact on remnants. Agricultural development, urban/rural residential and urban development, and the development, maintenance and upgrade of public infrastructure have resulted in the clearing and modification of large areas of the ecological community since European settlement. Queensland and NSW have state legislation to control the clearing of native vegetation, and Victoria and the ACT have requirements to consider the impacts of native vegetation removal in their planning approval processes. However, despite these controls, the removal and modification of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland continues. The seriousness of the threat on-going clearing poses to native flora and fauna is recognised by the listing of “Clearing of native vegetation” as a Key Threatening Process under the NSW TSC Act, “Land clearance” under the EPBC Act and “Habitat fragmentation” in Victoria as a Threatening Process for fauna under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 (FFG Act). In NSW, the Native Vegetation Act 2003 (NV Act) permits the clearing of native vegetation (including within listed threatened ecological communities) via an array of “Routine Agricultural Management Activities” (RAMAs), such as the construction, operation and maintenance of rural infrastructure. A similar range of agricultural activities and a number of industries (e.g. mining, transport, electricity and community infrastructure) are excluded from clearing controls under the Queensland legislation Vegetation Management Act 1999 (VM Act). Agricultural and Horticultural Development Large areas of this ecological community have been cleared and modified since European settlement for agricultural purposes (cropping, irrigation, and pasture improvement). The development and operation of agricultural enterprises resulting in clearing and modification of native vegetation and other impacts, continue to be major threats to the remaining areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, primarily due to their occurrence on fertile soils and predominantly privately owned land. This is a consequence of:  increases in the size of farm machinery and use of global positioning technology in cropping operations requiring the removal of paddock trees to allow for greater turning circles and larger unobstructed paddocks;  an increase in small area horticultural enterprises such as grapes and olives;.
17  an increase in the use of feed-lots;  expanding cropping enterprises and pasture modification;  the development of silviculture enterprises (e.g. Radiata Pine plantations);  altered soil fertility and increasing land degradation problems (erosion, salinity, soil structure decline) on areas already cleared; and  a poor understanding by land managers of the environmental services provided by remnant vegetation/paddock trees. Whilst maintaining biodiversity on-farm is perceived as beneficial by most farmers, the costs as a result of loss of productivity and recovery work can be prohibitive, especially during the transitional period of changing farming practices. Rural Residential and Urban Development In recent years there has been an increasing demand for urban development and rural residential subdivisions that impact upon Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. This has particularly occurred around many of the larger towns along the western slopes and tablelands of NSW, Victoria and within the ACT. This type of development results in not only the direct impacts of loss and fragmentation of native vegetation (as described above for houses, gardens, fences, roads, powerlines) but involves a range of other indirect impacts as a consequence of closer human settlement. These include:  changes to surface water runoff patterns and soil hydrological regimes;  changes to soil nutrient status from fertilisers and waste water disposal;  increased predation pressure as consequence of higher concentrations of domestic pets (particularly cats);  increased risk of weeds from introduced and locally non-indigenous plant species (trees, shrubs and grasses) used in gardens and difficulty in implementing weed control programs;  increased disturbance (noise, lights and human activity);  soil compaction from off-road recreational activities (cars/bikes/horses/etc.); and  illegal dumping. These indirect impacts exacerbate the detrimental impacts of clearing and fragmentation by reducing the habitat quality of remnants for native flora and fauna. Mining Mining poses a significant threat to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland because it is an industry generally excluded from clearing controls. Significant impacts have occurred in the Sydney Basin and NSW North Coast Bioregions, although past and present mineral, petroleum and coal mining impacts occur throughout the Box-Gum Grassy Woodland distribution. Land clearing is the main impact of mining, and tends to be severe and localised. Clearing may further result from service infrastructure to mining activities. Wider impacts from mining activities may stem from pollution, sedimentation or diversion of water ways, erosion, salinity and changed soil profiles..
18 Rehabilitation of mining sites has generally been poorly implemented in the past. Loss of topsoil from the original site, and specifically topsoil seed reserves, affects the rehabilitation potential of sites. Public Infrastructure Many of the larger and higher quality remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland occur on travelling stock routes (TSRs), road reserves and railway corridors (Prober and Thiele 1993). However, these areas are subject to on-going infrastructure maintenance and upgrade activities such as road widening, clearing, mowing, weed spraying, grading and burning. They are also often targeted for future infrastructure development, including powerline, gas and water pipeline construction, and telecommunication cable and tower installation. These developments may involve a range of activities, including clearing, ripping, excavation, stockpiling of topsoil and other materials, movement of vehicles and machinery and changes to surface water flows, which can have a detrimental impact on the quality and extent of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. These activities can result in further fragmentation, loss of habitat elements (native groundlayer, hollow trees), changes to soil moisture regimes and nutrient status, the creation of bare patches and the spread of high threat weeds. Grading of roadsides is a particular disturbance that appears to be the primary agent for the continuing spread of the high threat weeds African Lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula), and Coolatai Grass (Hyparrhenia hirta) on the north-west slopes (Spark and Nadolny 2004). In many cases the resultant weed invasion is irreversible, given the lack of successful permanent control techniques. Physical disturbances on land adjacent to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants can also have detrimental impacts. For example, drainage works (along roadsides and associated with urban areas and agricultural contour banks) often direct surface water into remnant vegetation increasing moisture levels and changing the soil nutrient status. In these less than favourable conditions for native species, weeds often dominate. The size and high quality of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland that occurs on some TSRs and areas of Crown land is often a serendipitous consequence of historic and current management which allows for long rest periods between disturbance/stock grazing events. However, funding arrangements for the NSW Livestock Health & Pest Authorities (LHPA) [formally Rural Lands Protection Boards (RLPBs)] have resulted in recent years in the relinquishment of a number of larger TSRs and vacant Crown land, (including areas of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland) and letting of short- and long-term leases for neighbouring landholders on TSRs by the LHPAs. These areas may then be managed as per the adjoining private land, often being subject to longer grazing periods, shorter and potentially inappropriately timed or non-existent rest periods and greater risk of weed invasion. In Victoria areas of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on crown land (unused roads, unreserved crown land) are leased for grazing. This usually leads to poor outcomes for conservation due to overgrazing and lack of weed control. 7.2 Conflicting Management Practices Given this ecological community is generally poorly represented within the conservation reserve system and a large proportion occurs on private land, there is significant potential for adverse consequences to the long-term survival of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland if remnant areas are not managed appropriately. Grazing Regimes and Pasture Management If not appropriately managed, livestock grazing can have a detrimental impact on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland by altering the structure and composition of the flora components of the ecological community through selective grazing of more palatable and regenerating.
19 species, trampling, soil compaction, changed soil nutrient status and weed invasion (McIntyre et al. 1993; Prober 1996). Sheep grazing is potentially more destructive than that of cattle because of differences in grazing habits. Typically sheep graze more uniformly than cattle, grazing down to soil level and selecting the most palatable plant species, including regenerating canopy species (Wells 1969 cited in Lunt 1991). Cattle have a greater potential to trample and compact the ground than do sheep if the ground is wet, which can cause damage to native plant tubers and soil structure, and result in changes to drainage and differential germination of species (i.e. favouring exotic species over natives) (Rainer Rehwinkel pers. comm. 2009). The resulting changes in plant species diversity and composition within remnants can also lead to reductions in the diversity of the woodland fauna assemblage (Johnson and Beck 1988; Loyn 1991; Saunders 1994; Bromham et al. 1999; Spark and Nadolny 2004). Prober and Thiele (2004) found a significant difference between the floristic composition of the remnants on cemeteries and TSRs/roadside which they attributed to their different grazing histories. Cemeteries have little or no grazing history and generally exhibited a higher diversity of native grasses while TSRs/roadsides usually have intermittent grazing, which may lead to some species, both native and exotic, dominating. A significant difference in understorey composition was seen between eastern and western woodlands, potentially attributable to overstorey composition and different grazing histories. Future management practices will need to be tailored accordingly, with emphasis on understorey composition and individual species’ dominance. Firewood Collection and ‘Tidying-up’ The collection of firewood from Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants significantly reduces the habitat value. Dead standing trees and fallen timber provide protection and feeding substrates for a variety of woodland birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians and invertebrates. Fallen timber also provides the base material and environmental conditions for nutrient recycling. Additionally, the disturbance caused during the collection of firewood can lead to the spread of weeds as a result of the removal of material and the movement of people and vehicles within remnants. Woodlands and forests of the western slopes and tablelands (which include Box-Gum Grassy Woodland) are most threatened by dead timber removal as they contain preferred firewood species (DECC 2003). The significance of the threat posed by this activity is recognised by the listing of the “Removal of dead wood and dead trees” as a Key Threatening Process under the NSW TSC Act. “Tidying-up” is an activity which generally involves the removal of standing dead timber, fallen logs, rock and litter from woodland areas. Many people are unaware of the ecological consequences of this activity. Further, it is an activity often considered integral to good land management (ANZECC 2001) and is sometimes carried out for supposed fire hazard reduction. However, the removal of standing or fallen dead timber, surface rock and litter significantly reduces habitat (nesting, shelter and foraging substrates) for many woodland fauna species (invertebrates, amphibians, reptiles, small mammals) and has been linked to the loss of woodland birds (Reid 1999). These elements are also essential to the maintenance of nutrient cycles within woodlands providing the raw materials and habitat for the many organisms (insects, fungi and micro-organisms) which break down and incorporate this material into the soil. The detrimental impact of “tidying up” on the natural ecosystems is currently recognised by the listing of the “Loss of hollow-bearing trees from Victorian native forests” and “Loss of coarse woody debris from Victorian native forests and woodlands” as Potentially Threatening Processes under the FFG Act. Similarly, “Loss of hollow-bearing trees” and “Removal of dead wood and dead trees” are listed as Key Threatening Processes in NSW under the TSC Act. “Bushrock removal” is also listed as a Key Threatening Process in NSW under the TSC Act..
20 Changed Fire Regimes It is likely that prior to European settlement, periodic burning by bushfires and Indigenous people played an important role in the development and maintenance of grassy ecosystems. On the other hand, too frequent or extensive burning may limit recruitment of some species, cause local extinctions of fire sensitive species, facilitate the spread of some exotic species (such as Coolatai Grass), reduce fauna habitat features (fallen logs, hollow trees, litter) and threaten fauna populations (Clarke 1999; Davies 1999). Morgan and Lunt (1999) found that a lack of fire in Australian temperate grasslands can lead to sward collapse and weed invasion. The threat posed by inappropriate fire regimes is recognised in Victoria with the listing of “High frequency fire resulting in the disruption of life cycle processes in plants and animals and loss of vegetation structure and composition” and “Inappropriate fire regimes causing disruption to sustainable ecosystem processes and resultant loss of biodiversity”, as Potentially Threatening Processes under the FFG Act. Similarly in NSW, “High frequency fire resulting in the disruption of life cycle processes in plants and animals and loss of vegetation structure and composition” is listed as a Key Threatening Process under the TSC Act. Increased Soil Nutrients and Use of Chemicals Increased soil nutrient status as a consequence of fertiliser application, run-off and spray drift from adjoining paddocks, soil disturbance or stock camps causes changes in soil structure and soil biota and results in a more favourable environment for weeds. Changes to the soil nutrient status can result in a loss of native understorey species and dieback of overstorey species (Windsor 1999), with negative flow-on effects to the fauna assemblage. The use of herbicides and other pesticides to control weeds and agricultural insect pests can have significant impacts on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants. Herbicides can create bare patches which allow weeds to establish or spread, change groundlayer composition and threaten the health of overstorey trees. For example, aerial spraying in northern NSW for St John’s Wort control has in the past defoliated significant areas of Box- Gum Grassy Woodland, while the use of herbicides around grave-sites in cemeteries is likely to have significant knock-on effects on native species adjacent to and downslope of the spraying. Other pesticide use can have detrimental impacts on the natural food webs and therefore the fauna assemblages within Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, the extent of which is yet to be fully understood. Native plants are adapted to the inherent nutrient status of the soils which support them. The application of fertilisers (e.g. superphosphate) and soil ameliorants (e.g. gypsum or lime) alters the natural soil nutrient status and availability, and thus can change the species composition and diversity within native plant communities and reduce the habitat value for fauna. Mowing or Slashing Regimes Mowing and/or slashing may be used as alternatives to burning to open out dense swards of Kangaroo Grass, and thus encourage other native herbs and grasses. However, mowing can easily facilitate the spread of weeds (e.g. Coolatai Grass and African Lovegrass) as a result of poor machinery hygiene and/or through the smothering of native species and creation of bare patches by slashings left on the site. Additionally, if mowing height is too low (<10 cm), low growing grasses [e.g. Windmill Grass (Chloris truncata)] and exotic forbs [e.g. Flatweed (Hypochaeris radicata)] can become abundant, replacing taller tussock grasses and changing both the structure and species composition of the groundlayer (McIntyre et al. 2002). If done at the wrong time, mowing/slashing may also threaten the.
21 replenishment of the soil seed store. Mowing/slashing can also be detrimental to some fauna if too low, or at breeding times (e.g. for bush stone-curlew). Revegetation Management The extensively cleared and fragmented nature of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland indicates that in many areas active regeneration techniques will be required to ensure the long-term viability of this ecological community. However, there is potential for well- intentioned projects using these techniques to lead to further degradation of remnants and competition by planting inappropriate species (exotics or locally non-indigenous natives), planting trees and shrubs at inappropriate densities, over-collection of seed for regeneration purposes, and facilitating weed invasion through disturbance to the soil and groundlayer in preparation for planting. Additionally, planting of exotics and/or locally non-indigenous native trees, shrubs and grasses adjacent to or adjoining remnants may lead to the spread of wildlings and changes to groundlayer species composition. There is also concern, although little is currently known, about the potential genetic impact of planting locally indigenous species sourced from geographically distant areas (Eddy 2002). However, a recent review of this issue highlighted the problems associated with using local seed which may be of poor quality, which can lead to restoration failure (Broadhurst et al. 2008). The scale of local adaptation of many species is largely unknown and the “use local seed” recommendation in many guidelines is based on a precautionary principle. In fragmented ecosystems where many of the remaining remnants are small it can be extremely difficult to source locally genetically robust seed. Broadhurst et al. (2008) recommended that restoration projects opt for a better seed source even if it must be sourced from further away rather than using low quality local seed. 7.3 Degrading Landscape Processes Weed Invasion The term ‘weed’ is used to describe any species, native or exotic, that is not considered a natural part of the ecological community. Weeds are generally considered detrimental to a system as they compete with locally indigenous flora species for the available resources (water, light and nutrients) and can lead to a decline in the diversity and regenerative capacity of native species. They can also reduce and/or change the fauna habitat values of woodlands by affecting the type and availability of food resources (seeds and fruits), amount of foliage cover, light penetration and litter volume. Such changes can have significant impacts on the natural food webs and fauna populations within the woodland ecosystem. Weed invasion is generally favoured by soil disturbance, alterations to surface water flows and changes in soil nutrient status (use of fertilisers), overgrazing and sometimes fire. The spread of weeds is facilitated by the movement of machinery, vehicles, people and animals across the landscape. All Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants have some level of weed invasion, and it is likely that all will require some degree of active weed management to ensure long-term integrity. Some weed species are particularly threatening to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland as they are highly competitive and actively exclude locally indigenous species. Prober et al. (2002) found a difference in nitrate levels in degraded remnants and rarely grazed reference sites. Higher nitrate levels are associated with increased weed invasion, with exotic annuals replacing perennial natives (Prober et al. 2002)..
22 Significant weeds that affect Box-Gum Grassy Woodland include:  Perennial grasses: Potentially pose the greatest weed threat to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, as they can completely dominate the woodland groundlayer. Commonly, these species are adaptable to a range of environmental and climatic conditions, produce large quantities of seed, have a persistent seed bank and are tolerant of heavy grazing, fire and chemical applications. Consequently, they are readily spread, difficult to control and as yet occupy only a proportion of their potential ranges (Parsons and Cuthbertson 1992; Muyt 2001; Spark and Nadolny 2004). There are currently no known practical methods for the broad-scale control of these species and research should be undertaken as a matter of urgency to ensure the recovery of this ecological community. Species of particular concern are: - Coolatai Grass, which has invaded extensive areas of woodland on the NSW North West Slopes over the past 50 years and is rapidly colonising roadside remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in the Upper Hunter. Coolatai Grass invasion is often independent of disturbance; - Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana), African Lovegrass and Serrated Tussock (N. trichotoma), which are highly invasive weeds common on the New England and Southern Tablelands of NSW; and - Phalaris (Phalaris aquatica), a widely used pasture grass and an aggressive invader of grassy ecosystems. The urgency of the threat posed by these introduced perennial grasses is recognised by the listing of the “Invasion of native plant communities by exotic perennial grasses” (TSC Act) and “Invasion of native vegetation by “environmental weeds” (FFG Act) as threatening processes in NSW and Vic respectively. Chilean Needlegrass, for example, is increasingly becoming a serious pasture and environmental weed in south eastern Australia and is difficult to remove once widely established.  Perennial herbs: For example, St John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) and Wild Sage (Salvia verbenaca). St John’s Wort has invaded extensive areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and without control, can dominate the groundlayer.  Annual grasses: For example, Wild Oats (Avena spp.), Bromes (Bromus spp.), Rye- grasses (Lolium spp.), Veldt Grasses (Ehrharta spp.) and Fescues (Vulpia spp.) readily invade disturbed remnants, and are prominent in the groundlayer in many remnants in southern NSW, the ACT and Victoria.  Annual and biennial herbs: For example, Clovers and Medics (Trifolium and Medicago spp.), Capeweed (Arctotheca calendula), Thistles (e.g. Cirsium vulgare, Carthamus lanatus) and Paterson’s Curse (Echium plantagineum) occur to varying degrees in most remnants.  Woody weeds: Substantial increases in the number of plantations of European Olive (Olea europaea) have occurred in the past decade. This species is problematic in other ecosystems, and without attention could become a major problem in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. African Olive (Olea europaea subsp. cuspidata), English Hawthorn (Crataegus monogyna), Sweet Briar (Rosa rubiginosa), Scotch Broom (Cytisus scoparius), African Boxthorn (Lycium ferocissimum), Radiata Pine (Pinus radiata), Blackberry (Rubus fruticosus) and Privets (Ligustrum spp.) are also significant problems in some areas. Victoria has listed “Invasion of native vegetation by Blackberry (Rubus fruticosus)” as a Potentially Threatening Process under the FFG Act..
23 Climate Change Climatic variation is one of the primary determining factors in the spatial distribution of species and the ecosystems they form. Climate change has occurred throughout geological time but human activity is now acknowledged as significantly accelerating the rate of this natural process (IPCC 2007). The specific impacts on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are as yet unknown. However, changing climate patterns, including rising temperatures and decreasing rainfall, are likely to contribute to reductions in extent, changed species composition, loss of species diversity due to fragmentation and isolation of remnants and changes in understorey structure. Predictions have been made as to the possible impacts affecting the agro-climatic zones in which the majority of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland occurs: Temperate Sub-humid and Temperate Cool-season Wet zones (Dunlop and Brown, 2008). Hotter summers, warmer winters with fewer frosts and higher evaporation rates are predicted, leading to more frequent fires with higher intensity. These changes are likely to favour new frost-sensitive species and summer-opportunistic weed species currently held at bay by regional rainfall patterns and/or temperature ranges (CSIRO, Australian Bureau of Meteorology 2007). Changes in seasonality are likely to see initial thickening of vegetation due to increases in carbon dioxide leading to shifts in competitive relationships between woody and grass component species (Conroy and Ghannoum 2006). It is predicted that the greatest impacts will be on highly fragmented remnants, restricting the ability of component species to move across the landscape to areas of more suitable climate and/or habitat and it is likely that the rate of local and regional extinction within these communities will significantly increase. Losses in nectarivorous bird populations are forecast as nectar becomes less abundant with flowering events being less frequent in a drying climate (Mac Nally et al. 2009). Poor flowering years leads to movement of bird populations to other areas, which leads to high use of energy, mortality and reduced breeding. The listing of Key Threatening Processes “Loss of climatic habitat caused by anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases” under the EPBC Act and “Anthropogenic climate change” in NSW under the TSC Act), and the Potentially Threatening Process of “Loss of terrestrial climatic habitat caused by anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases” in Victoria under the FFG Act; is a recognition of the significant impact of climate change on species, populations and ecological communities. Actions to combat the impacts of climate change in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland will be required to focus on enhancing the resilience of existing vegetation, habitats and species through reducing the impact of immediate threats to extent and condition. Salinity Across much of the distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland dryland salinity is a major land degradation issue. A study in 2007 estimated that almost 2000 ha of woody vegetation in the Boorowa Shire in the South West Slopes bioregion of NSW was affected by dryland salinity, representing nearly 6% of Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum woodland and about 1% of White Box (E. albens Benth) woodland in the shire (Seddon et al. 2007). Dryland salinity results from the widespread clearing of native trees and deep-rooted native perennial grasses, which actively extract water from the soil, and their replacement with shallow-rooted annual crops and/or weeds. As a consequence, more water enters the soil profile, causing water tables to rise, mobilising naturally occurring salts in the soil and carrying them to the soil surface. The impact of dryland salinity on native vegetation communities is well documented and results in:.
24  declining tree health and eventual death;  changes to understorey species composition with rising salt levels, salt tolerant species dominate;  declining groundcover and the appearance of large bare areas as soil structure breaks down and erosion increases; and  declining surface water quality, as salts are transported into the drainage system. While the direct impacts of dryland salinity on native fauna have not been studied, it is logical to assume that declining habitat health, loss of particular habitat elements (overstorey, midlayer, groundlayer and litter) and poor water quality as a result of salinity will result in a corresponding decline in fauna assemblages. Acid Soils Soil acidification is a natural process which may be markedly accelerated by agriculture. Improved pasture areas located near to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants will generally have higher soil nitrogen levels and thus a greater risk of nitrate leaching. Nitrate leaching is a major acidifying process, particularly where annual species predominate and nitrate is more easily leached below the root zone. Product removal associated with agriculture may also increase acidifying processes, although it is dependent on the crop. For example, lucerne hay removes the equivalent of 70 kg of CaCO3 per ton of hay, while wheat removes only 9 kgs per ton of grain (Upjohn et al. 2005). The implications are that agricultural land close to woodland areas may acidify resulting in loss of perennial species and weed ingress which could impact on adjacent woodlands. High quality woodlands are unlikely to be directly acidified, since they are usually low nitrogen systems with little or no nutrient leakage. Problems are most likely to occur where mismanagement of perennial native grasses, or oversowing of legumes with superphosphate application, could cause destabilisation of adjacent native grasslands. Most native grasses have medium to high tolerance of soil acidity, however native legumes may have much higher sensitivities. Further study is required to determine more exact impacts and tolerances. Declining Tree Health and Regeneration General decline in tree health in rural areas, coupled with reduced or lack of recruitment is a serious threat to the long-term viability of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Across much of its former range, this ecological community now occurs as small isolated remnants and/or is represented by scattered paddock trees. Trees in such landscapes are subject to a range of impacts including increased insect attack, changed soil nutrient and hydrological regimes, increased chemical drift, root disturbance, excessive mistletoe infestations and soil compaction. These impacts result both directly and indirectly from human activity. The detrimental effect of these impacts on the ecological community are further exacerbated by a lack of regeneration as a consequence of changed environmental conditions, conflicting grazing regimes, continued cultivation and/or clearing of regrowth for grazing (as permitted under the NV Act in NSW). Once these scattered trees and small remnants succumb either through age (senescence) or ill health (dieback) significant remnant areas of this ecological community will be lost. It is predicted that with the currently inadequate rate of regeneration, paddock trees will no longer be a feature of the agricultural landscape after 120 years (Gibbons et al. 2008). Current management recommendations which concentrate on increased recruitment will not be enough to reverse the loss (Gibbons et al. 2008)..
25 7.4 Other Potential Threats Animal Pests Introduced animal species are considered a significant threat to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Herbivores, such as rabbits, hares, goats and deer, increase grazing pressure, prevent regeneration of native trees and shrubs and facilitate the spread of weeds. Digging by rabbits and pigs causes soil and groundlayer disturbance. In the case of pigs, their preference for eating underground storage organs of native lilies, orchids and other forbs has a major impact on these species. Predators such as foxes, dogs and feral cats are a significant threat to native fauna, while introduced birds (e.g. Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis), European Starling (Sturnus vulgaris)) and the Honeybee (Apis mellifera) compete with native species for nesting sites and habitat resources. The significant landscape and habitat changes that have occurred since European settlement have led to ecosystem imbalances and resulted in some native animals becoming pest species. For example, the Noisy Miner (Manorina melanocephala) can often dominate small woodland remnants, significantly reducing the numbers of small insectivorous birds. In turn this has lead to increases in herbivorous insect populations resulting in tree dieback and defoliation (Loyn 1987; Grey et al. 1997). The importance of the threat posed by introduced pest animal species is recognised by various listings under legislation summarised in Table 2, below. TABLE 2: Animal Pests listed under legislation as a Threatening Process Animal Species Relevant Legislation * Goat  EPBC Act  TSC Act Rabbit  EPBC Act  TSC Act  FFG Act Bees  TSC Act  FFG Act Deer  TSC Act  FFG Act Fox  EPBC Act  TSC Act  FFG Act Cat  EPBC Act  TSC Act  FFG Act * Full Threatening Process listing titles appear in Appendix 5.
26 Disease Phytophthora cinnamomi is an introduced root-rot fungus which represents a major threat to native ecosystems. A microscopic soil-borne organism, widespread in southern Australia, P. cinnamomi attacks the roots and basal stem tissue of living plants. It interferes with the movement of water and nutrients to plants, causing root-rot and may result in the death of the plant (Botanic Gardens Trust undated). It is known that some component species of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland [e.g. grass trees (Xanthorrhoea spp.)] are susceptible to dieback caused by P. cinnamomi (Keith McDougall, pers. comm.). “Dieback caused by the root-rot fungus (Phytophthora cinnamomi)” is listed as a Key Threatening Process under the EPBC Act, TSC Act and FFG Act. Collection/removal of Native Flora The severity of the impact of the collection and removal of plant specimens (e.g. orchids, grass trees) for gardens and landscaping is currently unknown. It may, however, pose a potential threat given the increasing interest in backyard landscaping and the high cost of propagated specimens in commercial nurseries. “Collection of native orchids” is listed as a Potentially Threatening Process under the FFG Act in Victoria. Similarly, the increasing interest in the harvesting and propagation of native seed (trees, shrubs and grasses) for use in re-vegetation projects could prove detrimental to the long- term viability of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants should insufficient consideration be given to the recruitment requirements of the source ecological community. 8. Recovery Actions to Date Significant work has already been undertaken in regard to the recovery of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. This has included work by state, territory and regional Natural Resource Management (NRM) agencies, Conservation Management Networks (CMNs), non- government organisations (NGOs), universities and research institutes, scientists and ecologists and individual landholders. Various Australian Government programs have funded much of this work in cooperation with funding, in-kind support, and reserve and conservation agreement management by state and ACT governments. Details of the recovery actions undertaken to date are summarised in the subsections below. 8.1 Baseline Information Critical to the recovery of the ecological community is baseline data regarding the location, quality and management regimes of remnant sites. Baseline data enables the measurement of change, through additional monitoring, as a result of management activities. In the absence of this information it will be impossible to determine the rate of decline and whether recovery actions are successful in improving the status of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Ecological Community Extent and Condition Mapping Accurately quantifying and mapping both the current extent and condition of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is a complex task due to the ecological community being geographically widespread, highly fragmented and occurring on a wide range of tenures in varying condition states. Estimates of extant and pre-clearing extent have been derived from existing vegetation mapping data from relevant state and territory mapping programs. These estimates have generally been based on overstorey species and therefore have not considered remnant condition, therefore while indicative, result in an overestimation of the extent. A summary of the estimated extent of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in each.
27 jurisdiction is contained in Appendix 6. Projects considering remnant condition in mapping the ecological community have been undertaken primarily in the Southern Tablelands and South-West Slopes regions of NSW, and Northern Victoria. These include:  Using multi-image multi-spectral analysis of satellite imagery in the South Eastern Highlands of NSW creating data of structural formations of grassy vegetation (ERIC 2001; Walter and Schelling 2004; Walter and Schelling 2005).  Pilot project in the South West Slopes bioregion to identify high value biodiversity assets, including Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, using rapid assessment in conjunction with remote sensing techniques and expert local knowledge (DECC 2008 unpublished).  EVC mapping of Victoria (DSE 2002-2009).  Mapping of threatened grassy vegetation communities of the Goulburn Broken Catchment in Victoria (DSE 2006) and North East Catchment of Victoria (Earl et al. 2007). These projects have been successful in predicting various types of grassland and open woodland (Baines and Dunford 2008), and in combination with onsite surveys, have been used to develop regional models that include Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in various condition states. A project to collate all existing state and territory mapping datasets relevant to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland was conducted by the Environmental Resource Information Network (ERIN) within the Australian Government Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities (DSEWPaC), in association with state-based experts on Box- Gum Grassy Woodland. The objective of this project was to generate a map of the extent of the ecological community using the most accurate information available. The results are at Appendix 4. Further work on data licensing is needed to make the compiled data available to all government agencies. Verification that Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants identified from the project meet the definition of the listed ecological community will be continuous as a result of ongoing survey programs, including those conducted by the Grassy Box Woodlands (GBW) CMN on location and condition of sites on member’s properties. Site assessments of TSRs, cemeteries, roadside reserves, local government and Crown reserves, and private lands containing Box-Gum Grassy Woodland will enhance the accuracy of the collated data over time. The development of minimum condition criteria and assessment methodology by the Australian Government has assisted land managers in the local identification of the listed ecological community which in turn has aided the quantification of extent on private property. Component Species Surveys Much is yet to be learned of the composition, distribution and/or ecology of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland component species, although research has been carried out on specific threatened species in recent years. Some of the component species of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland have individual threatened status and are the subject of surveying and monitoring, including Regent Honeyeater (Xanthomyza phrygia), Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor), Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis pinguicolla), Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) and Striped Legless Lizard. Other research programs and surveys have improved baseline information on the Box-Gum Grassy Woodland component species, including:  site surveys conducted throughout the South Eastern Highlands and NSW South.
28 Western Slopes by NSW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water (DECCW) (data from which is held on the NSW Grassy Ecosystems Database), which has assisted in developing a greater understanding of species distributions and abundances throughout these regions;  Cowra Woodland Birds Program;  surveys of threatened and declining birds in the NSW sheep-wheat belt (Reid 1999, 2000);  vegetation and bird surveys of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants on TSRs and private land in the NSW sheep-wheat belt undertaken in conjunction with the GBW CMN and DECCW;  vegetation assessments in North East Victoria which provide information from a selection of sites mainly on public land, including the Goulburn Broken catchment (DSE 2006) and North East catchment (Earl et al. 2007);  data recorded through the implementation of the NSW Property Vegetation Planning process; and  surveys conducted under various university, CSIRO, state agency and NGO research programs (Radford and Bennett 2007). Further research is required before the complex species’ relationships and interdependencies and resource cycling within Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is fully understood. However, enough is known to begin reducing critical threats within an adaptive management framework. Summary of Baseline Information Actions Undertaken to Date:  The development of databases that include information on CMN members (land managers with Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants), remnant location, component flora and fauna species and remnant condition from surveys of CMN members’ sites and other sites (TSRs, reserves, cemeteries, roadsides, etc) with Box-Gum Grassy Woodland;  Development of minimum condition criteria and an assessment method, as part of the Australian Government listing, to assist land managers in the identification of the listed ecological community (DEH 2006);  Use of remote sensing techniques to develop regional models which include Box- Gum Grassy Woodland in various condition states;  Mapping of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland extent; and  Surveys conducted during various university, CSIRO, state agency and NGO research programs..
29 8.2 Protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Some sites of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland have been recognised as significant and are protected under various mechanisms. With the exception of the ACT, in which substantial areas of Box-gum Grassy Woodland are protected in public reserves, the number of remnants protected within the conservation reserve system still represents only a small proportion of existing remnants and only a very small proportion of the Box-Gum Woodland that is thought to have existed at the time of European settlement. Identifying priority areas for long-term and in-perpetuity protection is an important component of managing the recovery of the ecological community. Appendix 7 lists the public reserves in each state and territory which are known to contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, and Appendix 8 lists sites listed on the Register of the National Estate that are known to contain remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Australian Capital Territory The ACT still contains large areas (patches greater than 100 ha) of relatively well connected good condition Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants, as a consequence of the system of leasehold title and Land Management Agreements which have limited grazing pressure and prevented intensive pasture improvement (ACT Government 2004). The remaining areas are located at Gungahlin, Majura-Kowen, Callum Brae-Jerrabomberra and on rural land south and west of Canberra, existing as Yellow-Box-Red Gum Grassy Woodland. In 2003, it was estimated that about 7,035 ha of the remaining Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are within land use categories that do not permit clearing for urban and similar activities. This includes about 2,940 ha protected within nature reserves (see Appendix 7). 2990 ha are located in land zoned as Broadacre and Rural under the Territory Plan, some of which are under long term rural leases and Land Management Agreements. 840ha of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are located on land identified in the Territory Plan as urban or related land use categories (ACT Government 2004). Queensland Some areas of the Regional Ecosystems of which Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is a component (detailed in Section 2) are protected within the formal conservation reserve system. A number of conservation mechanisms are available to landholders for the protection and restoration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland including:  ‘NatureAssist’, a component of the Queensland Department of Environment and Resource Management (DERM) Nature Refuge Program under the NC Act(Q), to encourage conservation on private land. Currently there are 268 nature refuges across Queensland, protecting 550,000 ha of privately owned land (Qld EPA 2008), although the exact extent of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland under these agreements remains to be quantified. Reserves which are known to contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are listed in Appendix 7.  Land for Wildlife. A voluntary scheme managed by Greening Australia in cooperation with DERM, which aims to encourage and assist private landholders to provide habitats for wildlife on their property (Greening Australia 2007).  The Environmental Stewardship Program Box Gum Grassy Woodland Large High Quality Sites project, delivered through the Australian Government’s Caring for our Country initiative, was implemented in three NRM regions of southern Queensland in 2008/2009. The project targeted Box-Gum Grassy Woodland areas of 50ha or greater occurring on private land and provided funding via a competitive auction process. Nine successful land managers have been contracted to carry out management activities over 15 years to conserve 1370 ha of Box-Gum Grassy.
30 Woodland. Management actions pertinent to these projects include improving ground layer diversity through grazing management and control of weeds. The Queensland Murray-Darling Committee is the contracted delivery agent for the Environmental Stewardship program in Queensland. Of those land managers contracted in Queensland, three have opted to covenant their sites. New South Wales In NSW, Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is currently known to occur within at least 42 national parks, nature reserves and state conservation areas, although in some cases these remnants are quite small. A number of reserves with small remnants of BGGW were gazetted following the Southern Comprehensive Regional Assessment, including Stoney Creek Nature Reserve and Cuumbuen Nature Reserve. Additionally, the two sections of Queanbeyan Nature Reserve both contain areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. New remnant areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland were added to the formal reserve system with the enactment of Nandewar and Brigalow Community Conservation Area Act 2005 (e.g. Barayamal National Park on the northwest slopes). The exact area of the ecological community protected in NSW is currently still to be quantified, however in the South- Western Slopes bioregion, estimates suggest approximately 8000 ha occurs in national parks and nature reserves (Benson 2008). Reserves which are known to contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are listed in Appendix 7. The development of a regional Protected Area Network (PAN) along the Dananbilla–Illunie Range in the Young–Cowra–Boorowa area of the south-west slopes has facilitated the protection of large patches of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in four nature reserves and conservation agreements on private lands. A number of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants are listed under the Register of the National Estate, as shown in Appendix 8, including the Bala TSR Remnant Vegetation Site near Boorowa and Winton Cemetery Woodland Remnant near Tamworth. Crown land reserves gazetted for environmental protection and passive recreation that contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland include Brooks Hill Reserve near Bungendore and Gale Reserve at Queanbeyan. A variety of mechanisms have been used to protect Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on private and public land, including:  Conservation Agreements (CA) with DECCW, established under the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (NPW Act), are voluntary covenants that provide protection and conservation of natural and cultural heritage values on private and public land. These can be both in-perpetuity or for a defined period of time. Currently, at least 15 CAs protect Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites on private and public land including high quality remnants existing within the grounds of cemeteries at Monteagle, Currabubula, Wallendbeen, Marrar, North Berry Jerry and Stockinbingal. The exact area of the ecological community within CAs is yet to be determined.  The NGO Bush Heritage Australia currently owns and manages two properties in NSW that protect Box-Gum Grassy Woodland: Tarcutta Hills Reserve and Scottsdale Reserve, protecting an estimated 80 ha and 486 ha of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland respectively.  Trust Agreements under the NSW Nature Conservation Trust Act 2001, administered by the NSW Nature Conservation Trust (NCT). These can protect areas of native vegetation by registering covenants on land title. These are applied to the NCT revolving fund scheme which purchases, covenants and on-sells private land of high conservation value. The NCT has handled covenants on several properties for the protection of areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, including.
31 through the revolving fund scheme (Nature Conservation Trust 2009).  The Environmental Stewardship Program has delivered four competitive reverse auction rounds since 2007 in NSW. These rounds have targeted conservation of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in five CMA regions – Lachlan, Murrumbidgee, Namoi, Central-West and Border Rivers-Gwydir. To date a total of 192 land managers in NSW have been contracted for up to 15 years under the Program to manage and protect over 25,000 ha. Of those land managers contracted in NSW, 31 have opted to covenant their sites. Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands will be one of the targeted endangered ecological communities in the Environmental Stewardship Multiple Ecological Communities Project to be delivered across the Central West, Namoi and Border Rivers- Gwydir NRM regions in 2010/2011. Other mechanisms are available for the protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland including Property Vegetation Plans (PVP) under the NV Act, administered by the NSW CMAs. PVPs are voluntary, legally binding agreements between a landholder and the local CMA regarding the management of vegetation on individual properties. In addition, Wildlife Refuge agreements with DECCW under the NPW Act, Land for Wildlife voluntary property registration scheme coordinated by the Community Environment Network (CEN) in partnership with DECCW, and the Biobanking credit trading system to offset clearing of native vegetation and fauna habitat, are also available for the protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Victoria Areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are protected within the formal Victorian reserve system, including within the Chiltern-Mt Pilot National Park and Natural Features Reserve. The largest protected intact remnant is in the Snowy River National Park. Reserves within the formal reserve system which are known to contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland are listed in Appendix 7. In the Goulburn Broken Catchment, 31 high quality remnants have been identified on both public and private land with management and monitoring plans prepared for each (DSE, 2006). Puckapunyal Military Area, Puckapunyal, contains remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and is listed on the Register of the National Estate. The Dookie Bushland Reserve, Dookie, and the Boxwood Historic Reserve are significant remnants in northwest Victoria, as are, large areas on Defence land within the Wodonga area and in the Wodonga Retained Environment Network on local government and private land. The ecological community is not listed as threatened in Victoria however Bush Heritage Australia owns and manages two properties and the Trust for Nature has the capacity to protect properties in Victoria which have Box-Gum Grassy Woodland through a covenanting process. Other mechanisms are available for the protection and restoration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland including the “ecoMarkets” project under the Victorian Government Our Environment, Our Future Sustainability Action Statement 2006, which includes the, BushTender and EcoTender programs; and the BushBroker native vegetation credit trading system. Land for Wildlife, a voluntary scheme which aims to encourage and assist private landholders to provide habitats for wildlife on their property, is also available for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland protection. Various local incentive programs are funded via the Catchment Management Authorities. These mechanisms have the potential to provide long- term protection and restoration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants (DSE Website 2008)..
32 Environmental Stewardship Program The Environmental Stewardship Program is part of the Australian Government’s Caring for our Country initiative. It assists private land managers to maintain and/or improve the condition and extent of targeted matters of National Environmental Significance (NES) under the EPBC Act. The Program aims to fill a gap in natural resource management by providing market-based incentives for private land managers to engage in the long-term protection and rehabilitation of biodiversity assets on their land. Land managers can enter into funding agreements for up to 15 years. Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is the first biodiversity asset targeted by the Environmental Stewardship Program. The Environmental Stewardship Program is working in partnership with Catchment Management Authorities and Natural Resource Management Regions as delivery agents to run competitive reverse auction funding rounds in target regions. To date a total of 201 land managers have been contracted under Environmental Stewardship through five funding rounds, resulting in the management and protection of over 26,400 ha of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in New South Wales and Queensland. In 2010-11, the Environmental Stewardship Program will focus on maintaining and/or improving the condition and extent of multiple ecological communities (MEC) in selected NRM regions in NSW and South Australia. The NSW MEC project will again target Box-Gum Grassy Woodland as one of three ecological communities targeted in the Central West, Namoi and Border Rivers-Gwydir Catchment Management Authority (CMA) regions. The other ecological communities to be targeted are the Natural Grasslands on Basalt and Fine-textured Alluvial Plains of northern NSW and southern Queensland, and Weeping Myall Woodland. See www.nrm.gov.au/stewardship/ for contacts and more information. Summary of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Protection Actions Undertaken to Date  Establishment of a number of reserves across the geographic extent of the ecological community;  Listing of sites containing Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on the Register of the National Estate;  Establishment of a variety of mechanisms for the conservation of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on private and public land across the geographic extent of the ecological community;  Facilitation of land manager access to financial and other incentives for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation activities, including CMA incentive schemes and the Environmental Stewardship Program; and  Development of conservation management plans for protected/high quality sites in all states and the ACT, including actions that relate to the maintenance or enhancement of habitat for component species. 8.3 Community Engagement in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Conservation Community involvement is crucial to the recovery of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, given the highly fragmented nature of remnants and their occurrence on predominantly private land. As a consequence of the listing of the ecological community under the EPBC Act, an increasing number of private landholders and public land managers are becoming actively involved in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation activities, while an even greater number are requesting information on appropriate management. There are numerous community land management networks across the range of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland including Aboriginal networks, Landcare, production focussed groups and nature conservation focussed groups. The ability of these networks to incorporate biodiversity conservation information into their communication processes to date has been varied..
33 Critical to the community’s engagement in and understanding of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland has been the production of a flora field guide, funded partly through the Natural Heritage Trust. This publication, Grassland Flora: a field guide for the Southern Tablelands (NSW & ACT) Eddy et al. (1998) focussed on the ground flora and while designed for the south-eastern NSW region, has found wide application throughout the range of the Box- Gum Grassy Woodland. It has been instrumental in increasing people’s knowledge of the flora of this community. Conservation Management Networks Launched in October 1999, the Grassy Box Woodland (GBW) Conservation Management Network (CMN) was the first such network established in Australia. The NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service and research scientists Drs Suzanne Prober and Kevin Thiele were funded by the National Reserve System Program to develop a new model for the long-term conservation of highly fragmented ecosystems that are difficult to conserve through acquisition. The GBW CMN aims to link Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants and their owners/managers through a single network dedicated to protecting and managing this important ecosystem and to provide long-term, targeted, flexible, and responsive support to owners/managers, NGOs, researchers and government agencies involved in the management of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants. The GBW CMN also provides an opportunity to encourage members to consider in-perpetuity conservation mechanisms such as a Conservation Agreement. GBW CMN members continue to manage their Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants for a variety of purposes, although an important focus must be the protection of their natural values. The benefits of membership (from Prober, Thiele and Higginson undated) include:  formal recognition of the contribution of landholders and managers to woodland conservation;  contact with other Network members, relevant government agency/NGO extension officers and scientists;  sharing expertise and experience in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland management;  access to up-to-date information regarding Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and its management;  planning advice to enable integration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation into regional, local and property plans; and  advice and assistance with funding applications, legal protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants and promotion and publicity of woodland conservation efforts. Staffing for the GBW CMN currently comprises one co-ordinator located in Queanbeyan, NSW, and one GBW CMN Endangered Ecological Community Catchment Officer employed by the Lachlan CMA. The widespread distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants requires significant resources in order to provide effective on-ground, local support for land managers, new members and to assist local Landcare groups to incorporate biodiversity management into their programs. As at September 2010, the GBW CMN and the Southern Tablelands Grassy Ecosystem CMN had a combined membership of 1318 across NSW (T McLeish, pers. comm., 2010), including some institutional members in the ACT (such as university and CSIRO scientists), which equates to an equal (if not greater) number of sites of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland being actively managed for conservation outcomes. Membership continues to grow but more recently the GBW CMN has focused on forming partnerships with existing community.
34 networks such as Landcare to influence more managers, including Australian Government funding for a jointly managed project “Communities in Landscapes” The GBW CMN runs a variety of activities and programs aimed at increasing public awareness of conservation issues and improved management of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. In addition, the GBW CMN has an on-going program of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland survey on private and public lands aimed at improving the knowledge base in regards to the extent and quality of remnants across its NSW distribution. Other CMNs contributing to the protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland include:  Southern Tablelands Grassy Ecosystem CMN: established with Australian Government funding in 2002 and focuses on improving the conservation of both Box- Gum Grassy Woodland and the Natural Temperate Grassland of the Southern Tablelands (NSW and the ACT) endangered ecological community. These two EPBC Act listed threatened ecological communities often co-occur, either at the property- scale or at the landscape-scale under the management of Local Government Areas or LHPA;  Far South Coast CMN: funded by the NSW Southern Rivers CMA and DECCW, supports landholders managing native vegetation on private property, including Box- Gum Grassy Woodland;  Monaro Grassland CMN: works with private land managers in southern NSW “to develop and secure conservation of grassland sites across all land tenures” (Eddy 2007) and focuses on natural and derived grassland sites, including the derived remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in the north and south-west of the Monaro region; and  The Victorian Broken-Boosey, Gippsland Plains, Northern Plains, Goldfields and Wedderburn CMNs: focus on the protection, management and improvement of habitat and biodiversity within the rural landscape, a component of which is Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Engagement of Aboriginal Communities A draft copy of this plan was provided to Aboriginal Reference Groups in NSW across the range of the ecological community. In addition, a pilot project in partnership with the Aboriginal Reference Groups (ARG) of the Lachlan and Central West CMAs of NSW and DECCW was conducted to identify:  current Aboriginal community involvement in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland management;  areas within the catchments that contain Box-Gum Grassy Woodland which are of particular significance to Aboriginal people;  Aboriginal community interest in contributing to the preparation of the national recovery plan and implementation of recovery actions both on Aboriginal and public land; and  Most effective mechanisms to harness traditional knowledge of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and component species to strengthen current knowledge and assist in the recovery of the ecological community. The ARGs advise the CMAs on priority natural resource management and cultural heritage issues for Aboriginal communities and act as a conduit for the exchange of information.
35 between CMAs and local Aboriginal communities on natural resource management issues (DECC 2008). The CMAs and the ARGs work with the Aboriginal communities within each catchment to implement natural resource management programs. The pilot project assisted the Orange and Young Local Aboriginal Land Council to develop plans of management for three significant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites. The plans were completed in February 2010 and facilitate the ongoing restoration of these sites, highlighting opportunities for wider community education. For example, one site has the potential to incorporate a native plant nursery to propagate local seed, with the Council further envisaging a walking track through the site to best show cultural and ecological values. The success and expansion of the pilot projects in Young and Orange should increase future involvement and facilitate engagement of Aboriginal communities in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland site restoration. Further Aboriginal interest in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland across its range will be identified and Aboriginal community involvement in the conservation management of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland will be facilitated during the life of the recovery plan (see Action 3.5). All activities will be undertaken in a manner that respects the cultural traditions of Aboriginal groups throughout the range of this ecological community. Summary of Community Engagement Actions Undertaken to Date  Provision of advice by CMNs, state and territory NRM agencies to private and public land managers, community groups, TAFE, local government, Local Aboriginal Land Councils and schools;  CMN-organised extension activities (workshops, conferences, training, field days, site visits) for private landholders, public land managers, regional NRM agencies and local government;  Liaison between state and regional NRM agencies, CMNs, NGOs, universities and research organisations;  Co-ordination of research and survey programs and negotiation of access to Box- Gum Grassy Woodland sites on private property (facilitated by CMNs);  Development of GBW CMN education materials (brochures, posters, curriculum activities) including the publication and distribution of a quarterly newsletter, “Woodland Wanderings” and the Southern Tablelands Grassy Ecosystem CMN newsletter, “The Austral Bugle” (www.gbwcmn.net.au);  Production and wide distribution of Grassland Flora: a field guide for the Southern Tablelands (NSW & ACT) Eddy et al. (1998) to raise communities’ awareness of the flora of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland;  Provision of signage to GBW CMN members to identify Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants;  Development of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland information kit to assist land managers in identifying, managing and protecting threatened native vegetation communities of the Goulburn Broken catchment (DSE 2006);  Development of two Biolink projects in the north-east of Victoria: Chilton-Mt Pilot Biolink and Greta- Warbuy Killawarra Biolink targeting threatened vegetation including BGGW. These are a partnership between DSE, North-East CMA, Department of Primary Industries (Vic) and TFN (Vic);.
36  Native vegetation-ECV identification and management training (Sue Berwick pers. comm.);  Preparation of EVC brochures and “Managing your Patch of Bush kit” which included information of Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands (Titcumb 2002);  Targeted program in 2007/08 promoting BGGW in the North-East catchment of Victoria through leaflets and incentives;  Promotion of “best practice” management guidelines (Sharp et al. 2005; Oliver et al. 2008) through GBW CMN members and public land managers (http://gbwcmn.net.au/files/AdaptiveManagement09.pdf) ;  Development of an Environmental Stewardship Training Manual; and  Pilot project within Lachlan and Central West catchments of NSW to engage Aboriginal communities in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland recovery. 8.4 Ecosystem Function and Management Research Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and its component species require long-term management that will maintain, and ideally enhance, the conservation values of remnant areas. Appropriate management should be irrespective of the protection status of a site, although this may vary between sites depending upon landscape setting, disturbance and land use history. Restoration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland entails moving the ecological community from lower to higher condition states through changed management systems, as illustrated in the State and Transition Model in Appendix 3. Understanding how the ecological community functions, what functions are absent in individual remnants and how they can be returned is fundamental to recovery. Understanding the benefits of improved management of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland to the broader landscape, including benefits to agricultural production and the movement of native fauna, is an important area of investigation. The development and dissemination of ‘best practice’ management information as it becomes available is crucial. A significant proportion of research into the ecology of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland has been undertaken in central and southern NSW and the ACT. The Agricultural Landscapes Program of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Sustainable Ecosystems has undertaken research to improve ecological integrity and economic performance of farms and rural enterprises, including those affecting Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. This research has been undertaken in partnership with rural industries, universities and state government, including Charles Sturt University and The Fenner School of Environment and Society at Australian National University (ANU). The ACT Government, ANU and CSIRO are currently collaborating in the Mulligans Flat- Goorooyaroo Study, which focuses on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland management and the response to various experimental management actions such as fire, grazing exclusion, addition of woody debris and feral animal exclusion in two ACT nature reserve (ANU, 2008). The following are examples of important research (not comprehensive) undertaken into ecosystem function and management of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland which are applicable to the successful recovery of the ecological community. Component Species Composition Research of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland component species has focussed on ecosystem function as well as the impacts of various management actions including fragmentation,.
37 grazing and burning. Research has shown that species composition and ecological functioning varies across its distribution from north to south, primarily arising from climatic changes (Prober 1996). Studies of flora component species by Prober, Lunt and Thiele (2002) found that at a landscape scale, species richness of the groundlayer within little disturbed Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants declines naturally with increasing soil fertility. But at a local scale (i.e. within a remnant) soils under mature trees are more fertile and support a greater richness of understorey species than open areas. They also found that while Kangaroo Grass dominates open areas, Snow Grass tends to dominate under trees, and the abundance of both grasses is generally lower under trees facilitating the establishment of subsidiary species. Snow Grass and potentially Tussock Grass (P. labillardierei), because of their apparent preference for higher fertility soils, may be useful in restoring degraded areas with higher nutrient concentrations. Prober, Thiele and Lunt (2002) also looked at the physical and chemical properties of topsoil as determinants of understorey composition within remnants. Results showed that the soils of modified remnants were relatively low in nutrients, more acidic and more compacted than ungrazed remnants, and that high soil nitrate levels favour the dominance of annual and biennial weeds [including Rye Grass (Lolium rigidum), Black Oats (Avena barbata) and Paterson’s Curse (Echium plantagineum)]. Subsequent studies have demonstrated that temporary reductions in soil nitrate levels, through the addition of carbon sources (such as sugar or sawdust), limit weed growth and favour the establishment and growth of native groundlayer species (Prober et al. 2005; Smallbone et al. 2007). However, only plots seeded with Kangaroo Grass maintained low nitrate levels on the cessation of carbon addition (Prober and Lunt 2009). Studies of fauna component species have included relationships between species and characteristics of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants (Seddon et al. 2003) and the investigation of the use of species as indicators of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland condition (Lindenmayer et al. 2000; Freudenberger and Brooker 2004). Landscape Connectivity Fragmentation of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland due to clearing has lead to a critical loss of landscape connectivity and placed many component species at risk of local extinction. A high level of landscape connectivity is important to the maintenance of healthy ecosystems as it facilitates dispersal/interaction of species and the exchange of genetic material across the landscape. Landscape connectivity can be continuous (corridors) or discontinuous (patches which act as ‘stepping-stones’ between areas of habitat) and is dependent upon movement abilities of individual species. Research undertaken by the CSIRO on the Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus victoriae) in southern NSW indicates that paddock trees may be as important for the movement of species as the traditional linear corridors (Doerr and Davies 2007). Recommendations from this study for best management practice in relation to landscape connectivity include:  maintain and restore a variety of types of connectivity within any given landscape, including traditional corridors, vegetated drainage depressions and paddock trees;  ensure that paddock trees are separated by no more than 80-100 m;  while they may provide habitat, corridors should not be relied upon as habitat; and  restoration of connectivity should only be a priority in landscapes where patches support only small populations and are no more than 1.5 km apart. In all other areas the restoration priorities should focus on improving patch quality and size, especially those within 1.5 km of larger remnants..
38 A number of programs have been established that aim to improve landscape function of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, including connectivity. These include the Great Eastern Ranges Initiative and the key project areas of Kosciuszko to Coast, Slopes to Summit and Southern Highlands Link. Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is a focus of these projects and they have conducted conservation action planning workshops to identify priorities for conservation. Patch Size The minimum size requirement for a viable patch of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is highly dependent on a number of variables, including existing structure, habitat elements present, component species, disturbance history, surrounding landuse and connectivity to other remnants. Additionally, minimum patch size will depend upon which group or species of woodland flora or fauna are being considered. Studies by Prober and Thiele have shown that in the absence of outside disturbance, patches less than 2 ha can be viable habitat for many grasses and forbs (Prober and Thiele 1995); whereas in highly fragmented landscapes, birds such as the Peaceful Dove (Geopelia striata) and Fan-tailed Cuckoo (Cacomantis flabelliformis), may require patches greater than 400 ha (Barrett et al. 1994). Prober and Brown (1994) also identified that White Box require a minimum population of 500 trees to maintain genetic diversity. The TSSC listing advice for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland identifies a viable patch supporting high species richness as having a minimum size of 0.1 ha (TSSC 2006). Paddock Trees While scattered paddock trees may or may not constitute part of the listed ecological community, over large areas of its former range, scattered paddock trees are remaining representations of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Research conducted to date has identified the important role paddock trees play in maintaining ecosystem health and biodiversity within agricultural landscapes, by providing habitat for flora and fauna, facilitating species movement, maintaining gene pools, protecting soil biota and preventing soil degradation, salinity and erosion (Law et al. 2000; Fischer and Lindenmayer 2002; Gibbons and Boak 2002; Wilson 2002; Oliver et al. 2006; Lumsden and Bennet 2005). Gibbons et al. (2008) estimated that paddock trees and small remnants (<0.5 ha) represent approximately 40% of the remaining Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Consequently, in landscapes where clearing has reduced the extent of remnant woodlands to less than 30%, paddock trees are a key resource for woodland restoration (McIntyre et al. 2002). However impacts resulting from surrounding land use, coupled with isolation, have led to a relatively high mortality rate (0.6-2.4% lost per annum) and a low regeneration rate (approximately 20%) (Gibbons et al. 2008). Gibbons et al. (2008) predict that, without a change in management, within 120 years paddock trees will no longer be a feature of the agricultural landscape. Fischer et al. (2009) also acknowledged that under current management practices million of hectares would be treeless in the next few decades. However, the study found that the practice of reduced fertiliser use with fast-rotational grazing, which is characterised by prolonged rest periods in between short, intensive grazing events, could provide increased opportunity for regeneration. Management priorities include protecting paddock trees from clearing, chemical spray drift (herbicides and other pesticides), root disturbance (cultivation), fertiliser application and changes to soil-water regimes. Additionally, recruitment within highly cleared landscapes should be encouraged either in small islands and/or within nearby remnants. Hollow-bearing Trees The function of hollow-bearing trees within Box-Gum Grassy Woodland has been the subject of considerable research in recent years. Studies have found that the presence, abundance and size of hollows are positively correlated with tree basal diameter, which is.
39 an index of age (Lindenmayer et al. 1991a; Bennett et al. 1994; Shelly 2005). The minimum size-class at which trees consistently (>50% of trees) contain hollows varies depending on the species and environmental conditions, yet is always skewed toward the larger, more mature trees. Eucalypts containing large hollows are rarely less than 220 years old (Gibbons and Lindenmayer 2002). Larger, older trees also provide a greater density of hollows per tree (e.g. Bennett et al. 1994; Lindenmayer et al. 2000; Shelly 2005). As such, large old hollow- bearing trees are relatively more valuable to hollow-using fauna than younger hollow- bearing trees. The latter are important as a future resource. Although large hollow-bearing trees are numerically rare, vertebrate species strongly select them as nest and roost sites. A review of roost selection by bats demonstrated consistent selectivity for large hollow-bearing trees (Kalcounis-Rüppell et al. 2006). Many vertebrates are known to select hollows with specific characteristics, indicating that suitable hollows represent a fraction of the total hollow resource (Gibbons et al. 2002; Kalcounis-Rüppell et al. 2006). In agricultural landscapes hollow-bearing trees typically persist as isolated mature individuals in cleared paddocks or in small fragmented vegetation remnants (Bennett et al. 1994; Gibbons and Boak 2002). Such trees frequently suffer from poor health (e.g. 'dieback') and have a shorter lifespan than in forested landscapes (Yates and Hobbs 1997). Eventual loss of current hollow-bearing trees, and a lack of recruitment of younger trees to replace them, will result in a large decrease in the hollow resource over the wide geographic area covered by agricultural landscapes in the medium term. Fallen Logs and Litter Studies into the invertebrate faunal assemblages have shown that a decline in fallen logs and litter leads to a similar decline in the abundance and diversity of invertebrate groups within Box-Gum Grassy Woodland (Bromham 1999; Martin and Major 2001; Lindsay 2008). A strong relationship between high levels of fallen timber and the presence of mammals, including the Yellow-footed Antechinus (Antechinus flavipes) and Common Ringtail Possum (Pseudocheirus peregrinus) has also been demonstrated by Lindenmayer (Montague- Drake 2008). Fallen logs and litter (leaves, small twigs and branches) are important as they provide shelter, foraging substrates and food for a range of fauna (vertebrate and invertebrate) and additionally, provide the basic resource and suitable microclimate for nutrient recycling. Conflicting grazing and/or fire regimes, firewood collection as well as the desire to “tidy up” bushland patches often remove these elements from remnant areas. Modelling undertaken as part of the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyaroo Woodland Experiment by Killey (2008) suggests the expected volume of fallen timber in high quality Yellow Box-Red Gum Woodland remnants ranges between 7–12 cubic metres/ha, and is generated predominantly by large old senescing trees. Thus to maintain and/or improve ecological function, management of remnants should focus on protection of these large old trees, and promote the progression of degraded remnants towards uneven age stands which include old senescing trees (Killey 2008). Restoring logs to box-gum grassy woodlands has been shown to be beneficial in increasing beetle species richness and assemblage heterogeneity (Barton et al. 2009). Fencing Fencing remnant areas to restrict domestic stock grazing is widely recommended to assist in improving vegetation condition. Research undertaken into the effect of fencing on vegetation condition has demonstrated variable results generally attributed to different land use histories, starting condition, management within fenced sites and intrinsic site.
40 conditions (Spooner et al. 2002; Tremont 2005). However, these studies have demonstrated that fencing remnants can lead to improvements in the floristic diversity and vegetative cover of the groundlayer, better tree regeneration, less cover of introduced annual weeds and reduced soil compaction. Studies have also shown that there is a need to consider limiting the use of barbed wire on the top strands of fences around woodland remnants to reduce potential impacts on fauna species (Lindenmayer et al. 2003). Fire As previously discussed, it is likely that periodic burning by bushfires and Indigenous people played an important role in the development and maintenance of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Several studies have shown that burning can reduce dominance by Kangaroo Grass and by preventing a build up of plant litter in inter-tussock spaces stimulate growth and flowering of other native species (Stuwe and Parsons 1977; Davies 1999). However, cessation of burning for 14 years at a site on the South West Slopes did not lead to sward collapse in that grassland during the time of the study (Prober et al. 2007). Snow Grass does not recover as rapidly as Kangaroo Grass after burning, and the relative dominance of these two grasses in remnants appears to be regulated by the fire frequency (Prober et al. 2007). The Kangaroo Grass/Snow Grass understorey is most resilient to various fire regimes when both species remain in moderate abundance (Prober et al. 2007) Few fire studies have been undertaken to date in groundlayer dominated by other grass species such as Redgrass (Bothriochloa macra), Wallaby Grass (Austrodanthonia spp.) and/or Speargrass (Austrostipa spp.). Consequently, research by CSIRO is continuing to determine appropriate fire regimes for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in all its various condition states across its geographic range. While appropriate burning regimes will depend on the initial floristic composition and history of a remnant, early results from research conducted in southern NSW suggest that autumn burning cycles approximately every 5-8 years are adequate to maintain floristic diversity in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants dominated by Snow Grass and Kangaroo Grass (Prober, Thiele and Lunt 2007). Mosaic burns should be applied to all remnants (i.e. burning small areas at staggered intervals) to allow survival of soil and ground fauna (including invertebrates, amphibians and reptiles) and maintain overstorey regeneration (Barlow 1998; Eddy 2002; McIntyre et al. 2002). Sites where burning is practiced should also retain unburnt areas, to provide refuges for species of fauna and flora that may be fire intolerant. Monitoring changes in species composition and habitat elements post-burning is essential to ensure fire regimes are maintaining or improving remnant quality, rather than contributing to further degradation. Grazing Management Research assessing the impact of different grazing regimes on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland indicates that levels of degradation in remnants increase as grazing intensity from domestic stock increases, and that grazing regimes have a greater influence on remnant quality than does patch size (Prober and Thiele 1995). Sites subject to heavy grazing, particularly set- stocking, over long periods of time generally have lower native species diversity and consequently an increased dominance of exotic species (Lindsay and Cunningham 2009a). Grazing alters the structure and composition of the flora components of the ecological community by the selective grazing of more palatable species, trampling, soil compaction, changed soil nutrient status and weed invasion (McIntyre et al. 1993; Prober 1996). Grazing has also been shown to reduce the rate of litter decay, a crucial step in nutrient recycling (Lindsay 2008). The top soil for grazed sites is enriched with various forms of nitrogen and phosphorous (Lindsay and Cunningham 2009a). Reductions in the diversity of the woodland fauna assemblage can also be directly related to changes in plant species diversity and composition within remnants (Johnson and Beck 1988; Loyn 1991; Saunders 1994; Bromham 1999; Spark and Nadolny 2004). Thus, as a general rule, increasing the.
41 level of grazing within a remnant is likely to degrade it further. It has also been found that the history of grazing is as important as current use, as change in the soil structure to pre-grazing levels can be extremely long, i.e. 30 years plus (Lindsay and Cunningham 2009a). However, it has long been accepted that if a strategic grazing regime is targeted at controlling weeds or thinning dense grass swards at particular times of the year, it can lead to improved plant species diversity and cover. Lunt et al. (2007) reviewed all the ecological factors that influence vegetation responses to grazing. The results of this investigation indicate that livestock grazing has the greatest potential to assist conservation outcomes in degraded sites on fertile soils, where grazing may promote native plant diversity by reducing the biomass of dominant species (native or exotic). In contrast, domestic stock grazing is likely to either have no effect or a negative impact where good condition vegetation exists on poorer soils. Lunt et al. (2007) provides a coarse flowchart to indicate where managed grazing may result in a positive conservation outcome. Further research is required to establish effective management of grazing regimes including when, where and how grazing might be useful in maintaining and/or enhancing the biodiversity values of remnants across the geographic distribution of the ecological community. A study by Lindsay and Cunningham (2009b) found that sites with grazing removed had benefits for components of the invertebrate community, including beetles and for the process of litter decomposition. Areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland which are principally managed for conservation may be impacted by over-abundant numbers of kangaroos where such grazing pressure is not appropriately managed. The ACT Government has commenced a study into the effects of kangaroo grazing on the structure and composition within Natural Temperate Grasslands and Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Ecological Communities. Regrowth Thinning Without adequate regeneration to replace existing mature trees in remnants or scattered across paddocks, Box-Gum Grassy Woodland condition will deteriorate. Unfortunately tree regeneration is often seen by land managers as a threat to productivity by reducing the grazing capacity of an area. Stands of regenerating trees do self-thin over time as a result of competition for water and nutrient resources, disease, insect attack and catastrophic events (storms, floods and droughts). However, eucalypts are long-lived (potentially more than 300 years) and as a result this process is slow and often in conflict with human requirements. While some manual thinning of prolific stands of eucalypt regrowth may be beneficial for agricultural production and potentially may mimic the natural process of self-thinning, further research is required to determine the amount of thinning that can be undertaken without impacting on the long-term viability of the ecological community. Replanting Research has shown that remnant vegetation provides habitat for a different array of species than replanted areas (Montague-Drake 2008) and replanting should only be considered as value adding to remnant vegetation, not as a viable replacement. Replanted areas rarely duplicate the total function of the natural ecological community and differing habitat values may include structural complexity, tree hollows, fallen timber, vegetative litter, groundlayer composition/cover and soil nutrient/moisture regimes. Many of the values of remnant vegetation will be absent from areas of replanting for long periods of time (e.g. tree hollows need 80-150 years to form). However, replanting of overstorey species will be necessary in many extensively cleared remnants to retain and restore function. The reintroduction of understorey seed will be.
42 necessary to rehabilitate degraded remnants, as native seedbanks that are short-lived are exhausted and natural seed dispersal is no longer happening (Prober and Thiele 2005). A “Restoration Study” undertaken by Lindenmayer in 2000 showed blocks of tree replanting within a mosaic of native grasslands, remnant woodland and paddock trees can provide important habitat for a range of fauna species (Montague-Drake 2008). This study confirmed that, in terms of provision of wildlife habitat, planting size and shape matters. The study also found that bigger blocks are better than smaller, and blocks are better than strips (Montague-Drake 2008). A study on avifaunal collapse in woodlands in largely agricultural landscapes recommended restoration, including replanting, as most beneficial in the more-fertile areas, particularly those adjoining existing remnants (Mac Nally et al. 2009). Development of Management Guidelines Various guidelines relating to the management of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants have been developed to disseminate the findings of ecosystem function and management research to landholders and managers. These include:  “Wildlife on farms: how to conserve native wildlife” (Lindenmayer et al. 2003);  “Managing native grassland: a guide to management for conservation, production and landscape protection” (Eddy 2002);  “Managing native pastures for agriculture and conservation” (Langford et al. 2004);  “Managing and Conserving Grassy Woodlands” (McIntyre et al. 2002);  “Grassy Vegetation in North-western NSW and Guidelines for its Management and Conservation” (Nadolny et al. 2003);  “Grassy Ecosystems Management Kit: A guide to Developing Conservation Management Plans.” (Sharp et al. 2005);  “Birds in woodland remnants in the Central Lachlan Catchment: remnant characteristics and management guidelines” (Briggs et al. 2003);  “Possible Management Actions for Box Gum Woodlands” (Oliver et al. 2008);  “Grassy Woodland Threatened in the Goulburn Broken Catchment” (DSE 2005a) and “Grassy Woodland Threatened in the North East Catchment- draft” (DSE 2005b); and  “Caring for our Country, Environmental Stewardship Box Gum Grassy Woodland Project, Field and Training Manual” (DEWHA 2008a). In addition, Greening Australia is developing a Box Gum Grassy Woodlands Land Managers Handbook for DSEWPaC. Summary of Ecosystem Function and Management Research Actions Undertaken to Date  Investigation into the impacts of various management actions on flora species composition of grassy ecosystems including fragmentation, grazing and burning.  Research into the ecology and habitat requirements of some component species..
43  Research, primarily in central and southern NSW into various restoration strategies/methods to improve species diversity/cover, habitat values and regeneration within degraded remnants.  Investigation into the impact of the high threat weed, Coolatai Grass on component flora and fauna species.  Investigation into the use of birds and reptiles as indicators of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland condition.  Development of various management guidelines to assist landholders in the assessment, management and monitoring of grasslands and grassy woodlands.  The development of “Possible Management Actions for Box Gum Woodlands” (Oliver et al. 2008) to maintain or improve the quality of remnants for inclusion in the Property Vegetation Planning - Threatened Species Assessment Tool (NSW); 8.5 Compliance and Regulatory Activities The listing of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland as a “critically endangered” ecological community under the EPBC Act means that any activity (development or management) that is likely to have a significant impact on the ecological community must be referred to the Australian Government Minister for the Environment and undergo an environmental assessment and approval process. As a consequence, state and territory governments have been required to make provisions within their policy and planning processes in order to identify the community, assess these activities and minimise potential impacts. Similarly, threatened component species of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland have been protected under state and territory legislation. Summary of Strategic Planning, Compliance and Regulatory Actions Undertaken to Date  Listing of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and a number of component species under Commonwealth and state/territory legislation which require Commonwealth, state, regional and local authorities/agencies to consider the impact of development activities.  Preparation of action plans (ACT), recovery plans, Priorities Action Statements and threat abatement plans (Commonwealth, NSW) for threatened Box-Gum Grassy Woodland component species.  Incorporation of threatened grassy woodland dependent species and Box-Gum Grassy Woodland as an endangered ecological community into the Property Vegetation Plan (PVP) decision support tools (NSW).  Development by the Australian Government of minimum condition criteria and an assessment method to assist land managers in the identification of the listed ecological community (DEH 2006).  Planning Framework for Natural Ecosystems of the ACT and NSW Southern Tablelands – a joint ACT/NSW initiative.  Development of the Wodonga Retained Environment Network Strategy to protect native vegetation, largely Grassy Woodland EVC and the Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands and derived Grassland endangered community in peri-urban Wodonga (Davidson et al. 2006)..
44 PART C: RECOVERY PLAN - OBJECTIVES, PERFORMANCE CRITERIA AND ACTIONS 9. Recovery Plan Objectives The overall objective of this recovery plan is to promote the recovery and prevent the extinction of the critically endangered ecological community, known as Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. The specific objective to be achieved within the life-span of this recovery plan is to minimise the risk of extinction of the ecological community through:  achieving no net loss in extent and condition of the ecological community throughout its geographic distribution;  increasing protection of sites with high recovery potential;  increasing landscape functionality of the ecological community through management and restoration of degraded sites;  increasing transitional areas around remnants and linkages between remnants; and  bringing about enduring changes in participating land manager attitudes and behaviours towards environmental protection and sustainable land management practices to increase extent, integrity and function of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. This objective will be achieved across the geographic distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and within five years of the adoption of this recovery plan. 10. Recovery Plan Actions The recovery actions considered critical to achieving the objective and the performance criteria against which success or failure will be determined are outlined in Table 3. As discussed, this recovery plan covers an ecological community which extends from southern Queensland to northern Victoria, involving four state/territory and Commonwealth jurisdictions. As a consequence of this large geographic area and the numerous tenures and land managers (government agencies, NGOs and private landholders) involved, specific responsibility for recovery actions has not been assigned. This recovery plan seeks to build upon all the recovery actions and achievements to date. Improving baseline information regarding the extent and quality of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is considered a priority under this recovery plan. Research and monitoring programs are essential to the implementation and currency of “best practice” management and critical to determining the success of recovery actions. The outcomes and learnings of research and management actions undertaken as part of implementing the plan will be fed back into modifying and re-prioritising recovery actions during the life of the plan. Continuing support for the CMNs is also considered a priority under this recovery plan. This program will enable the delivery of numerous recovery actions (outlined in Table 3) in an efficient and cost effective manner, as well as provide coordination for other projects which may otherwise be undertaken independently. These networks are considered critical given the geographic extent, highly fragmented nature and number of government and private land-managers involved in the recovery of this ecological community. An independent network of extension officers has proven successful in liaising with private landholders and encouraging involvement in conservation of the ecological community..
45 Realistic and practical landholder incentives are also an essential part of encouraging widespread participation and cooperation from private landholders. These incentives may include council rate relief/rebates, pest and weed control grants, fencing grants, providing access to extension officers, best management practice or property management plans and stewardship payments. 11. Performance Criteria The criteria against which these objectives will be measured are outlined in detail in Table 3. In general terms, however, the performance criteria for the objectives of this plan include:  An increase in the area of the listed ecological community and degraded sites under conservation management agreements and/or within the formal reserve system;  An increase in areas which meet the minimum condition criteria for the nationally listed ecological community;  Maintenance of floristic diversity, structural complexity and ecological function of the ecological community across its distribution;  A reduction in the level of specific threats;  An improvement in the landscape connectivity for remnants of the listed ecological community; and  An improvement in the overall condition of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants within formally reserved areas, areas protected under various conservation agreements and priority areas on publicly managed land (e.g. TSRs, road reserves) across its geographic range. 12. Implementation Schedule An indicative implementation schedule for the five year life of this recovery plan is outlined in Table 5. 13. Monitoring, Reporting and Review The recovery plan will be formally reviewed by the Australian Government against the performance criteria outlined in Table 3 after five years from the commencement of the plan in order to determine the implementation of actions and their effectiveness..
46 TABLE 3: RECOVERY ACTIONS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA TO ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVES OF THE RECOVERY PLAN STRATEGY 1: IMPROVE BASELINE INFORMATION Recovery Actions: 1.1 Establish agreed protocols across jurisdictions for the assessment of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland condition in Year 1 of the recovery plan implementation, and apply these on an ongoing basis. 1.2 Share data and reporting between jurisdictions, government and non- government agencies. 1.3 Investigate the occurrence of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in South Australia. 1.4 Collate existing survey and mapping data relating to Box-Gum Grassy Woodland into a central, updatable repository for use by stakeholder government agencies in mapping extent, protected areas and priority areas. Update repository on an annual basis. 1.5 Identify gaps in survey and mapping data across the predicted distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and engage communities and conduct future surveys to fill these gaps. 1.6 Investigate the further use of remote sensing and other assessment techniques to assist with the preceding actions and with Actions 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4. 1.7 Establish and apply protocols for non-technical monitoring5 of remnant areas. These should include as many of the elements as possible of the condition assessment protocols developed in Action 1.1. These protocols are to reflect the condition assessment protocols developed under Action 1.1. 1.8 Identify gaps in current monitoring to ensure the geographic range and ecological variation within the ecological community is represented, and to coordinate implementation and analysis of all monitoring. 1.9 Improve baseline knowledge of condition and generate benchmark data against which sites can be assessed for management actions and cost effectiveness of revegetation ranked. Potential Contributors: State Government NRM agencies, Commonwealth DSEWPaC Partners: GBW CMN, Universities and research institutions, regional NRM agencies6, NRM NGOs (e.g. Greening Australia, Friends of Grasslands, Landcare Groups, NCT, TFN Vic) Performance Criteria:  On-going improvement in the knowledge of the extent and quality of Box- Gum Grassy Woodland including the filling of information gaps as they become apparent.  Review of vegetation data in South Australia undertaken.  Data sharing, monitoring and reporting occurring across jurisdictions. 5 Monitoring that requires limited botanical experience 6 Includes local government.
47 TABLE 3: RECOVERY ACTIONS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA TO ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVES OF THE RECOVERY PLAN STRATEGY 2: INCREASE PROTECTION OF BOX-GUM GRASSY WOODLAND Recovery Actions: 2.1 Develop and implement an agreed strategy across jurisdictions for the establishment of a comprehensive, adequate and representative system of protected Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites. 2.2 Identify gaps in current reserve and off-reserve conservation protection in representing the geographic and ecological variation within the ecological community. 2.3 Using results of Action 2.2, identify key Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites to be considered for acquisition by government and non-government acquisition programs, including degraded areas for restoration. 2.4 Using results of Action 2.2, identify key sites important to the maintenance/improvement of landscape connectivity of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants to be managed under conservation agreements or similar protection mechanisms. 2.5 Negotiate protection for identified sites through a range of NGO and Government in-perpetuity conservation and management agreements and protective covenants. 2.6 Continue to encourage provision and uptake of funding for incentive and long-term stewardship schemes that target protection of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants, especially on private land. 2.7 Avoid where possible the conversion of public land containing Box-Gum Grassy Woodland to freehold and ensure it is managed appropriately. 2.8 Develop and implement management plans incorporating best practice management for priority Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites, including all reserves and public land sites. 2.9 Develop quantitative targets for areas reserved, improved and managed for conservation purposes. Potential Contributors: Regional NRM agencies, State Government NRM agencies, Commonwealth DSEWPaC Partners: NRM NGOs (e.g. Greening Australia, Friends of Grasslands, Landcare Groups, NCT), CMNs, TFN (Vic) Performance Criteria:  Targets for areas reserved, improved and managed for conservation purposes met and an improved network connecting existing Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants is protected under reservation and/or conservation agreements across its geographic extent and incorporating the ecological variation within the ecological community.  Land managers have access to and actively take up stewardship funding available for managing areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland for conservation outcomes. Areas are identified for targeted funding.  On-going review of protection mechanisms, and where appropriate modification of preferred protection mechanisms in respect of monitoring and research results.  Management plans for protected sites are prepared and implemented..
48 TABLE 3: RECOVERY ACTIONS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA TO ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVES OF THE RECOVERY PLAN STRATEGY 3: IMPROVE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT Recovery Actions: 3.1. Support the continued operation of the CMNs in NSW, and extension of the GBW CMN into Queensland and the ACT including employment of a national coordinator. Support continued operations of CMNs or other effective groups in Victoria (via bioregional networks or priority area basis). 3.2. Employ 10 part-time facilitators across the geographic extent of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland to support land managers and facilitate the implementation of actions in this recovery plan. Close consultation with regional NRM agencies will be encouraged to avoid duplication of effort. Provide further training and support to current extension staff in the conservation of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. 3.3. Develop and maintain a central database to support the implementation of the recovery plan including details of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites across the range of tenures and jurisdictions, details of conservation agreements/reservation areas, management activities, monitoring results and details of other initiatives as deemed appropriate. 3.4. Educate stakeholders in the identification, management, monitoring and benefits of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants, including local government and state government infrastructure management agencies, through the distribution of information material, newsletters, exhibits at field days, workshops and training. 3.5. Identify Aboriginal interest in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites and facilitate Indigenous involvement in conservation management of remnant Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on Aboriginal and public land for the 5 year duration of the recovery plan. 3.6. Install markers and signs, including utilising current signage programs, to indicate the location of high quality occurrences of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland along linear reserves including: roads, tracks, rail and utility easements. Potential Contributors: CMNs, state NRM agencies and regional NRM agencies Partners: Regional NRM agencies, Indigenous organisations, public land management agencies, weeds councils, utility agencies, local government, schools, Landcare groups Performance Criteria:  Funding for the CMNs is secure and on-going.  CMN activities extended into Victoria and Queensland.  CMN facilitators are employed in partnership with regional NRM agencies and the GBW CMN across the extent of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland.  A central database is maintained to track protection, management and/or restoration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites. All jurisdictions/tenures contributing to the stored information, for use by all relevant agencies.  Effective communication/education programs are delivered.  Increasing land manager, community and Indigenous involvement in Box- Gum Grassy Woodland conservation and increasing numbers accessing incentive and stewardship funding for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation management.  An increasing number of land managers are implementing “best practice” management on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites.  Increased area and number of locations managed and achieving an improvement in extent and condition..
49 TABLE 3: RECOVERY ACTIONS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA TO ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVES OF THE RECOVERY PLAN STRATEGY 4: CONTINUE ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION AND MANAGEMENT RESEARCH Recovery Actions: 4.1. Investigate the long-term effects of management activities (e.g. grazing, fire regimes, mowing/slashing, fertilising, chemical use, regeneration, hydrology and drainage, feral animal control, weed control and prevention, cultivation), through research and monitoring of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland at selected sites across its range. 4.2. Identify best practice models from existing research and individual site success (e.g. GBW CMN and Action 3.3) to promote to stakeholders. 4.3. Identify sites with high recovery potential and target restoration at these remnants for cost-effectiveness. Ensure identified sites cover a range of condition states (see Appendix 3) so that cost effective models are investigated to improve functionality (transition of State 3 to State 2) and to restore understorey species (transition of State 2 to State 1). 4.4. Investigate the impact of high threat weeds on component species and develop control methods that will not adversely impact the existing diversity in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Nominate high threat weeds not already listed for noxious weed status in each jurisdiction. 4.5. Survey and analyse the distribution of component species other than vascular plants, (e.g. invertebrates, reptiles, birds and non-vascular plants), to gain an understanding of geographic variations and ecological relationships, and their management needs. Investigate the potential to develop faunal groups as indicators of condition. Incorporate research results into management practices including any regional differences. 4.6. Monitor condition and diversity of protected sites under varying management regimes. Identify regional differences and causes. 4.7. Continue to disseminate research results to stakeholders. Link with other organisations and programs (e.g. Greening Australia, Friends of Grasslands, Landcare Groups, NCT) to develop, promote and facilitate “best management” practice. Potential Contributors: Universities and research institutions, State Government NRM agencies, regional NRM agencies, NRM NGOs, DSEWPaC Partners: Public land management agencies, rural fire services, universities and research organisations, weed councils, private land managers, NRM NGOs (e.g. Greening Australia, Friends of Grasslands, Landcare groups, NCT), CMNs Performance Criteria:  “Best practice” guidelines are dynamic and continue to be updated and informed by research and stakeholder experience. Results of all research projects are documented and “best practice” guidelines widely distributed.  Monitoring programs are in place and results show an improvement in the quality (condition) of protected Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites.  Further sites are identified for recovery actions and restoration guidelines prepared.  Restoration activities based on vegetation condition/habitat enhancement are underway.  Current approaches to landscape restoration validated, particularly models for where to increase the extent and connection of remnants..
50 TABLE 3: RECOVERY ACTIONS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA TO ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVES OF THE RECOVERY PLAN STRATEGY 5: IMPROVE COMPLIANCE AND REGULATORY ACTIVITIES Recovery Actions: 5.1. Develop and implement a strategy to:  enhance the understanding of government and non-government organisations regarding Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation issues; and  improve consideration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation in the development consent process and/or in local/regional planning (e.g. CMA, local councils, LHPAs, government agencies). 5.2. Integrate conservation issues associated with Box-Gum Grassy Woodland with other landscape conservation programs (e.g. land degradation, salinity control and biodiversity programs). 5.3. Require development assessments to be undertaken by qualified ecologists, at an appropriate time of year. Potential Contributors: Commonwealth DSEWPaC, state NRM and regional NRM agencies Partners: Local government, regional NRM agencies, public land management agencies, utility authorities, rural fire services Performance Criteria:  Box-Gum Grassy Woodland is identified as a threatened ecological community in all relevant landscape conservation programs, regional strategies and other planning documents, (e.g. CAPs, local environment plans, regional catchment strategies, biodiversity action plans, water sharing plans)  No net loss of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland incorporated as a principle in all relevant environmental plans, as indicated by monitoring data from Action 4.6  Relevant Local and State government bodies have developed policies and plans that identify Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants as areas of high conservation value and direct resources to manage areas accordingly.  An assessment/management guide suitable for non-specialist decision- makers has been developed and distributed to all organisations.  Deficiencies in legislation and regional planning frameworks are documented and where applicable recommendations for change are made to relevant government agency.  Assessment standards for assessment of Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands and a process to decline inadequate reports..
51 PART D: MANAGEMENT PRACTICES As outlined in Section 7, on-going clearing, fragmentation and degradation are the major threats to this ecological community. The biodiversity within Box-Gum Grassy Woodland lies predominantly in the grassy groundlayer, hence the importance ascribed to derived grasslands in the listing of this ecological community. Management practices within, and/or adjacent to, remnant areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland can significantly impact on floristic cover and composition and fauna habitat values of the ecological community. 14. Guide for Decision Makers In determining whether proposed development activities may have a significant impact on Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, decision makers should refer to the Listing Advice (TSSC 2006) and the EPBC Act Policy Statement on White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland (DEH 2006). This document provides information to aid decision makers in determining the presence of the listed ecological community on a site, how to assist recovery, and examples of activities that may potentially have a significant impact on the ecological community and thus require environmental assessment. 14.1 Management Practices Essential to the Maintenance and/or Improvement of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland In determining whether proposed development activities may have a significant impact on the ecological community, decision makers (consent authorities and/or regional planning agencies) should consider the site management practices in Table 4 below. These practices are considered essential to the recovery of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland, as they provide for the on-going survival and reproduction of the suite of flora and fauna species which comprise the ecological community. Development activities which will potentially lead to a change in any one of these conditions within, or adjacent to, an area of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland could have a significant impact on the listed ecological community. Such developments require referral for environmental assessment and approval under the EPBC Act. Many of the impacts associated with development activities can be reduced if they are considered at the planning stage. For example, ensuring developments are restricted to previously cleared land and/or degraded sites, providing adequate buffers between urban/rural residential/agricultural development and remnant vegetation and/or placing controls on the ownership of domestic pets in subdivisions that adjoin remnants. Decision makers should also note that the management practices outlined in Table 4 will further facilitate the improvement of degraded areas of Box–Gum Grassy Woodland..
52 TABLE 4: Current Best Practice Site Management Practices for the Continued Existence of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Maintain or improve soil conditions  Avoid physical disturbance (e.g. cultivation, ripping, excavation).  Avoid chemical changes (e.g. use of fertilisers or soil ameliorants).  Avoid soil compaction from vehicles/machinery or stock camps. Maintain or improve drainage conditions / existing hydrological regime  Do not direct run-off (from roads, urban developments, contour banks) into remnant areas.  Do not divert existing run-on from remnant areas (e.g. diversion drains). Control exotic plant introductions  Prevent the introduction of exotic pasture species (i.e. pasture improvement).  Prevent the introduction of non-indigenous native species.  Ensure machinery hygiene protocols are implemented to prevent the spread of weeds.  Prevent the stockpiling of topsoil or overburden within remnant areas.  Implement a weed control program to control weed invasion, wildlings from adjacent tree plantings (e.g. Radiata Pine and European Olives) and garden escapees. Implement a buffer zone to help control weed introductions and protect remnant from herbicide drift. Avoid inappropriate native tree planting  Do not plant indigenous native trees/shrubs in high quality and/or small derived grassland sites.  Use high quality seed. Where practical this should be of local provenance, but high quality non-local seed should be used in preference to low quality local seed.  Plant trees and shrubs at natural grassy woodland densities. Maintain or improve connectivity  Ensure existing links are maintained between Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants and/or between Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and other native vegetation types, for example grassland, woodland, forest, riparian and/or wetlands.  Expand sites to increase viability where possible. Avoid excessive shading  Prevent changes which will result in prolonged shading (e.g. dense tree plantings). Maintain or improve structural diversity  Prevent the removal of regenerating trees and shrubs within remnant patches.  Prevent firewood collection or the “tidying up” of fallen dead timber and leaf litter.  Prevent rock removal.  Prevent the removal of standing dead hollow trees.  Maintain complete structure of woodland without allowing a full canopy to develop, shading out understorey species. Ensure adequate buffers are retained  Protect areas of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland from adjacent land use (e.g. urban and agricultural development) that may potentially impact on its integrity..
53 TABLE 4: Current Best Practice Site Management Practices for the Continued Existence of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Minimise chemical use  Weed control should use spot-spraying, basal spraying, stem injection or cut and paint application methods.  Avoid overspray and minimise impacts on non-target species.  Monitor treated areas to ensure weeds do not establish on any resultant bare patches. Implement strategic grazing  Ensure remnant areas are rested at appropriate times, for example when perennial native ground cover species are flowering and seeding.  Limit grazing during drought periods.  Grazing levels should not be increased above historical levels. Where a site has never before been grazed by livestock, an alternative (e.g. fire, no intervention) should be used for management.  Maintain a minimum of 80% ground cover at all times and biomass at an appropriate level to the region and season. Monitor outcomes to determine effectiveness and adapt management efforts. Implement appropriate burning regimes  The minimum fire interval suggested for Box-Gum Grassy Woodlands is five years, with a maximum interval of 40 years7. Fire regimes implemented should have regard to the floristic composition and condition of the remnant. For example, remnants dominated by Snow Grass and Kangaroo Grass were found to regenerate well with autumn burning cycles approximately every 5-8 years, where this had historically occurred (Prober et al. 2008). Such high frequency burning cycles may negatively impact other native species, however, and further research is required before burning regimes can be explicitly determined.  Any burning should be applied to remnants in mosaics (i.e. burning small areas at staggered intervals) to allow survival of soil and ground fauna (including invertebrates, amphibians and reptiles) and promote diversity in the states of the ecological community.  Sites where burning is practiced should retain unburnt areas, to provide refuges for species of fauna and flora that may be intolerant of fire.  Timing of burns must be considered in relation to the flowering and seeding of native and exotic species. Where possible burns should be carried out after natives have seeded but before weeds flower and seed.  Be aware that some weed species (e.g. Coolatai Grass) increase with burning. 7 Adaptive Management Guidelines for Box Gum Grassy Woodlands, produced by the NSW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water and the Grassy-Box Woodland Conservation Management Network. Available at http://gbwcmn.net.au/files/AdaptiveManagement09.pdf . The NSW Rural Fire Service also provides fire thresholds for Vegetation Categories – see individual Bush Fire Risk Management Plans at http://www.rfs.nsw.gov.au/dsp_content.cfm?cat_id=1040.
54 TABLE 4: Current Best Practice Site Management Practices for the Continued Existence of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Avoid inappropriate mowing / slashing  If mowing/slashing is used to reduce biomass within remnants and increase species diversity, it should be carried out sporadically, and in a mosaic pattern to allow for the retention of refuges for tall tussock grasses, regenerating overstorey and groundlayer dependent fauna as well as habitat features (such as fallen logs, litter). The height of the slasher must be sufficient to maintain enough cover to offer native fauna species protection.  Mow/slash at appropriate times (e.g. late summer or autumn after native ground layer plants have seeded and become dormant).  On-road sides, only mow areas essential for visibility and safety, in most cases this will be to the table drain. Mow from clean areas out.  Ensure machinery hygiene protocols are implemented to avoid the spread of weeds. Control feral animals  Protect native fauna and flora populations by controlling feral predators; foxes, dogs, cats, pigs within and/or adjacent to remnant areas.  Do not push fallen or felled timber into stacks or windrows within remnant areas as these form harbours for foxes, cats and rabbits.  If ripping is used to control rabbits within remnants ensure machinery hygiene procedures are adhered to, and ripped areas are monitored to prevent weed infestations.  Protect native flora by controlling feral grazers (e.g. rabbits, goats and deer) within remnants. Erecting appropriate fencing (e.g. fencing of stock dams, individual guards for targeted threatened plants) may help. Exclude commercial apiary sites  Do not permit commercial apiarists to place bee hives within the area. Landholders should not allow the placement of bees on their property within 3 km of the remnant..
55 TABLE 5: Implementation and Costing Table for Recovery Actions Identified for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Estimated Costs / Year in $ Thousands Action No Action Title Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total Cost Priority1 Potential Contributors 1.1 Establish agreed protocols for the assessment of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland condition and apply on an on-going basis. 20 + + + + 20 1  CMNs  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations 1.2 Share data and reporting between jurisdictions, government and NGOs. # # # # # 1  All levels of government  NGOs 1.3 Investigate the occurrence of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland in South Australia. # 1  Commonwealth and SA Government 1.4 Collate existing survey and mapping data to produce an updatable map of extent, protected areas and priority areas for landscape connectivity. 100 100 10 10 10 230 1  Commonwealth and state NRM agencies 1.5 Identify gaps in survey and assessment data. See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 2  State NRM agencies  Industry groups 1.6 Investigate the further use of remote sensing and other assessment techniques to assist with above. See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 See Action 1.3 2  State NRM agencies 1.7 Establish agreed protocols for monitoring of remnant areas by non-technical stakeholders. These protocols are to reflect the condition assessment protocols developed under Action 1.1. 10 + + + + 10 1  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations 1.8 Identify gaps in current monitoring to ensure the geographic range and ecological variation within the ecological community is represented, and to coordinate implementation and analysis of all monitoring. 10 + + + + 10 1  CMNs  State and regional NRM agencies 1.9 Improve baseline knowledge of condition and generate benchmark data against which sites can be assessed for management actions and cost effectiveness of revegetation ranked. + + + + + 3  State NRM agencies 1 Priority ratings: 1= Action critical to meeting plan objectives, 2= Action contributing to meeting plan objectives, 3= Action desirable but not essential to the plan. # Costs of this action are covered as part of Action 3.1 and 3.2. + No direct costs are estimated for the plan, but the action must be considered by all relevant authorities and organisations..
56 TABLE 5: Implementation and Costing Table for Recovery Actions Identified for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Estimated Costs / Year in $ Thousands Action No Action Title Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total Cost Priority1 Potential Contributors 2.1 Develop and implement an agreed strategy across jurisdictions for the establishment of a comprehensive, adequate and representative system of protected Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. 20 + + + + 20 1  State NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations 2.2 Using results from Action 1.4 Identify gaps in current reserve and off-reserve conservation protection in representing the geographic range and ecological variation within the ecological community. 150 150 + + + 300 1  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations  NGOs 2.3 Using results of Action 2.2 identify key sites to be acquired by acquisition programs. See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 1  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations  NGOs 2.4 Using results of Action 2.2 identify key sites important to the maintenance/improvement of the landscape connectivity of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland remnants. See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 See Action 2.2 1  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations  NGOs 2.5 Negotiate the protection of key sites through a range of management agreements and protective covenants. # # # # # 1  State and regional NRM agencies  NGOs 2.6 Encourage provision of funding for incentive and long-term stewardship schemes. #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ 1  All levels of government 2.7 Discourage the conversion of public land containing Box- Gum Grassy Woodland to freehold and ensure it is managed appropriately. + + + + + 1  All levels of government 2.8 Develop and implement management plans for priority Box- Gum Grassy Woodland sites, including all reserves and public land sites. 100 100 100 + + 300 1  State and regional NRM agencies  NGOs  CMNs 2.9 Develop targets for areas reserved, improved and managed for conservation purpose. + + + + + 2  State and regional NRM agencies  NGOs  CMAs 1 Priority ratings: 1= Action critical to meeting plan objectives, 2= Action contributing to meeting plan objectives, 3= Action desirable but not essential to the plan.
57 TABLE 5: Implementation and Costing Table for Recovery Actions Identified for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Estimated Costs / Year in $ Thousands Action No Action Title Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total Cost Priority1 Potential Contributors # Costs of this action are covered as part of Action 3.1 and 3.2 + No direct costs are estimated for the plan, but the action must be considered by all relevant authorities and organisations 3.1 Employ GBW CMN coordinator. 80 83.2 86.5 89.9 93.5 433.1 1  State NRM agencies CMN operating costs. 150 154.5 159.1 163.9 168.8 796.3 1  State NRM agencies 3.2 Employ 10 CMN facilitators (P/T) across Box-Gum Grassy Woodland extent to co-ordinate CMN activities. 300 309 318.2 327.8 337.6 1592.6 1  State NRM agencies 3.3 Database development. 30 30 1  State NRM agencies On-going database maintenance. 10 10 10 10 10 50 1  State NRM agencies 3.4 Develop communication and education strategies. # # # # # 1  CMNs Educate stakeholders. 100 100 100 100 100 500 1  CMNs  State and regional NRM agencies* 3.5 Identify Aboriginal interests in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland sites. 50 #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ 50 2  CMNs  Regional NRM agencies Facilitate Indigenous involvement in conservation management. # # # # # 2  CMNs  Regional NRM agencies  Local Indigenous organisations 3.6 Install markers and signs. 10 10 10 10 10 50 3  CMNs  State NRM agencies 1 Priority ratings: 1= Action critical to meeting plan objectives, 2= Action contributing to meeting plan objectives, 3= Action desirable but not essential to the plan # Costs of this action are covered as part of Action 3.1 and 3.2 * Regional NRM includes local government + No direct costs are estimated for the plan, but the action must be considered by all relevant authorities and organisations.
58 TABLE 5: Implementation and Costing Table for Recovery Actions Identified for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Estimated Costs / Year in $ Thousands Action No Action Title Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total Cost Priority1 Potential Contributors 4.1 Investigate long-term impacts of management activities. 200 200 200 200 200 1000 1  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations 4.2 Identify sites where current management practices are beneficial to biodiversity and promote these sites as models. # # # # # 1  CMNs  Universities and research organisations  Regional NRM agencies 4.3 Investigate cost effective restoration techniques. 250 250 250 250 250 1250 1  Commonwealth and state NRM agencies,  Universities and research organisations  NGOs 4.4 Identify high threat weeds and develop appropriate control methods. 100 100 100 + + 300 1  State and regional NRM agencies,  Universities and research organisations 4.5 Survey and analyse the distribution of component species other than vascular plants to gain an understanding of their ecology and management needs, and potential use as condition indicators. 200 200 200 + + 600 2  State NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations 4.6 Monitor condition and diversity of protected sites under varying management regimes. Identify any regional difference in Box-Gum Grassy Woodland ecological community response to management. + + + + + 2  State and regional NRM agencies  Universities and research organisations 4.7 Disseminate research results to stakeholders. Link with other organisations and programs to develop, promote and facilitate “best management” practice. #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ 1  GBW CMN  Universities and research organisations  State and regional NRM agencies 1 Priority ratings: 1= Action critical to meeting plan objectives, 2= Action contributing to meeting plan objectives, 3= Action desirable but not essential to the plan # Costs of this action are covered as part of Action 3.1 and 3.2 + No direct costs are estimated for the plan, but the action must be considered by all relevant authorities and organisations.
59 TABLE 5: Implementation and Costing Table for Recovery Actions Identified for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Estimated Costs / Year in $ Thousands Action No Action Title Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total Cost Priority1 Potential Contributors 5.1 Develop and implement a strategy to enhance the understanding of government and non-government organisations regarding Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation issues and improve consideration of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation in the development consent process and/or in local/regional planning. #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ #/+ 1  CMNs  All levels of government 5.2 Integrate Box-Gum Grassy Woodland conservation issues with other landscape conservation programs. + + + 2  All levels of government 5.3 Require development assessments to be undertaken by qualified ecologists, at an appropriate time of year. + + + + + 2  All levels of government Total 1890 1766.7 1543.8 1161.6 1179.9 7542 1 Priority ratings: 1= Action critical to meeting plan objectives, 2= Action contributing to meeting plan objectives, 3= Action desirable but not essential to the plan # Costs of this action are covered as part of Action 3.1 and 3.2 + No direct costs are estimated for the plan, but the action must be considered by all relevant authorities and organisations.
60 15. References Accad A, Neldner VJ, Wilson BA and Niehus, RE (2008) Remnant Vegetation in Queensland: Analysis of Remnant Vegetation 1997-1999-2000-2001-2003-2005, including Regional Ecosystem Information. Queensland Herbarium, Environmental Protection Agency, Brisbane. http://www.epa.qld.gov.au/publications. ACT Government (2004) Woodlands for Wildlife – ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. Action Plan No 27. Environment ACT, Canberra. ACT Government (2005) Yellow Box-Red Gum Grassy Woodland Information Sheet, Environment ACT, Canberra. ANU (2008) Garooyaroo Study The Australian National University Website, www.fennerschool- research.anu.edu.au/cle/gooroo/index.php ANZECC (2001) A National Approach to Firewood Collection and Use in Australia. Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council. Aretino B, Matysek A, Holland P and Peterson D (2001) Cost Sharing for Biodiversity Conservation: A Conceptual Framework. Productivity Commission Staff Research Paper. Austin MP, Cawsey EM, Baker BL, Yialeloglou MM, Grice DJ and Briggs SV (2002) Predicted Vegetation Cover in Central Lachlan Region. Final Report of the Natural Heritage Trust Project AA 1368.97 CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology, Canberra Australian Government (2007) Environmental Stewardship Program – Fact Sheet: Box-Gum Grassy Woodland. Caring for our Country Funding Website, www.nrm.gov.au/stewardship/pubs/boxgum- factsheet.pdf Australian Government (2008) NRM – Caring for our Country Website, Viewed on 25 May 2009, http://www.nrm.gov.au/stewardship/index.html Baines G and Dunford M (2008) Grassland Modelling in the Southern Tablelands. Unpublished report by Environment ACT for the National Recovery Team for National Temperate Grassland. Barlow T (1998) Grassy Guidelines: How to manage native grasslands and grassy woodlands on your property. Trust for Nature (Victoria), Melbourne. Barrett GW, Ford HA and Recher HF (1994) Conservation of woodland birds in a fragmented rural landscape. Pacific Conservation Biology 1: 245-256. Barton PS, Manning AD, Gibb H, Lindenmayer DB and Cunningham SA (2009) Conserving ground-dwelling beetles in an endangered woodland community: Multi-scale habitat effects on assemblage diversity. Biological Conservation 142: 1701-1709. Beadle NCW (1981) The Vegetation of Australia. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Bennett AF, Lumsden LF and Nicholls AO (1994) Tree hollows as a resource for wildlife in remnant woodlands: spatial and temporal patterns across the northern plains of Victoria, Australia. Pacific Conservation Biology 1: 222-235. Benson J (1991) The effect of 200 years of European settlement on the vegetation and flora of New South Wales. Cunninghamia 2: 343-370 Benson J (2008) New South Wales Vegetation Classification and Assessment: Part 2 Plant Communities of the NSW South-western Slopes Bioregion and update of NSW Western Plains plant communities, Version 2 of the NSWVCA database. Cunninghamia 10(4): 599-673 Botanic Gardens Trust (undated) Facts about Phytophthora. Royal Botanic Gardens, Sydney. Viewed on 13 July 2009, http://www.rbgsyd.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/90618/Phytophthora_Brochure.pdf Briggs S, Seddon J and Doyle S (2003) Birds in woodland remnants in the Central Lachlan Catchment: remnant characteristics and management guidelines. NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service, CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems, Canberra. Broadhurst LM, Lowe A, Coates DJ, Cunningham SA, McDonald M, Vesk PA, Yates C (2008) Seed supply for broadscale restoration: maximizing evolutionary potential. Evolutionary Applications 1: 587-597 Bromham L, Cardillo M, Bennett AF and Elgar MA (1999) Effects of stock grazing on ground invertebrate fauna of woodland remnants. Australian Journal of Ecology 24:199-207..
61 Clarke PJ (1999) Plant population processes in temperate woodlands in eastern Australia. In Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia: Biology, Conservation, Management and Restoration.” Eds. Hobbs RJ and Yates CJ. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Sydney. Conroy J and Ghannoum O (2006) Will rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations favour invasive species over natives in Australia’s rangelands? Paper presented at the Climate Change and Invasive Species Workshop, Biological Diversity Advisory Committee, Department of the Environment and Heritage. Canberra, 20th November 2006. CSIRO, Australian Bureau of Meteorology (2007) Climate change in Australia: Technical Report 2007. CSIRO publication. Davidson I, Datson G, Alker-Jones J, Bush T, Rudd D (2006) Wodonga Retained Environment Network. A Threatened Species & Habitat Conservation Strategy. Albury-Wodonga Corporation, Albury. Davies R (1999) Description, distribution, conservation status and weed management of box and buloke grassy woodlands in South Australia. In “Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia: Biology, Conservation, Management and Restoration.” Eds. Hobbs RJ and Yates CJ Surrey Beatty and Sons, Sydney. DEC (2005) Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland – profile. NSW Department of Environment and Conservation. NSW Threatened Species Website. viewed on 26 May 2009, http://www.threatenedspecies.environment.nsw.gov.au/tsprofile/profile.aspx?id=10837 DECC (2003) Removal of Dead Wood and Dead Trees. Key Threatening Process - Final Determination. NSW Scientific Committee. DECC (2008) Discussion Paper: Towards an Aboriginal land management framework for NSW. Department of Environment and Climate Change, Sydney. DEH (2006) White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodlands and derived grasslands. EPBC Act Policy Statement. Department of the Environment and Heritage. DEWHA (2008a) Caring for our Country – Environmental Stewardship - Box Gum Grassy Woodland Project Field & Training Manual. Australian Government, Canberra. DEWHA (2008b) Caring for our Country – Environmental Stewardship - Box Gum Grassy Woodland Project Implementation Plan. Australian Government, Canberra. Doerr VAJ, Doerr ED and Davies MJ (2008) Corridors and Connectivity: what, where and why? In Proceedings of the Better Bush on Farms Conference, Sept 2007. Charles Sturt University, Albury. DSE (2002-2009) Biodiversity Interactive Map 2.0 (map layer – Ecological Vegetation Classes). Viewed on 13 July 2009, http://nremap-sc.nre.vic.gov.au/MapShare.v2/imf.jsp?site=bim_external DSE (2005a) Grassy Woodland Threatened in the Goulburn Broken Catchment. Department of Sustainability and Environment, Benalla DSE (2005b) Grassy Woodland Threatened in the North East Catchment (draft). Department of Sustainability and Environment, Wodonga DSE (2006) Threatened grassy vegetation communities of the Goulburn Broken Catchment. Department of Sustainability and Environment, Benalla. DSE (1996-2009) Ecological Vegetation Class (EVC) Benchmarks for each Bioregion. Viewed on 7 July 2009 http://www.dse.vic.gov.au/DSE/nrence.nsf/LinkView/43FE7DF24A1447D9CA256EE6007EA8788062D358 172E420C4A256DEA0012F71C#benchmark Dunlop M and Brown PR (2008) Implications of climate change for Australia’s National Reserve System: A preliminary assessment. Report to the Department of Climate Change, February 2008. Department of Climate Change, Canberra, Australia. Earl G, Berwick S, Hill K (2007) Box-Gum Grassy Woodland and derived native grasslands in North East Victoria. Unpublished report to the Department of Sustainability and Environment, Victoria, Melbourne. Eddy, D., Mallinson, D, Rehwinkel, R. and Sharp, S. (1998) Grassland Flora: a field guide for the Southern Tablelands (NSW & ACT) . Environment ACT, NSW NPWS, WWF, ANBG, DLWC and Environment Australia. Eddy DA (2002) Managing Native Grassland. A guide to management for conservation, production and landscape protection. WWF Australia, Sydney..
62 Eddy D (2007) The Monaro Grassland Community Management Network. Reconnecting the sward. Ecological Management and Restoration 8: 165-176 Elix J and Lambert J (1997) More than just the odd tree: Report on incentives and barrier to rural woodland conservation. National Research and Development Program on Rehabilitation, Management and Conservation of Remnant vegetation, Research Report 1/98. Environment Australia (2005) Interim Bioregionalisation of Australia. Version 6.1, Viewed on 25 May 2009, http://www.environment.gov.au/parks/nrs/science/pubs/map9.pdf EPA (2003) Regional Ecosystem Description Database (REDD) Version 3.2. Queensland Environmental Protection Agency, Brisbane. ERIC (2001) Remote Sensing Detection of Native Grasslands using Multi-Image Spectral Analysis - South Eastern Highlands of NSW. Prepared for NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service by Environmental Research and Information Consortium Pty Ltd. Fifield G and Streatfield S (2009) Introducing … Whole of Paddock Rehabilitation (WOPR). A new approach to regreening the farm. Greening Australia Capital Region. Fischer J and Lindenmayer DB (2002) The conservation value of paddock trees for birds in a variegated landscape in southern New South Wales. 2. Paddock trees as stepping stones. Biodiversity and Conservation 11: 833-849. Fischer J, Zerger A, Warren G, Sherren K and Forrester R (2009) Reserving a tree regeneration crisis in an endangered ecoregion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA. Freudenberger D and Brooker L (2004) Development of the focal species approach for biodiversity conservation in the temperate agricultural zones of Australia. Biodiversity and Conservation 13: 253-274. Gibbons P and Boak M (2002) The value of paddock trees for regional conservation in an agricultural landscape. Ecological Management and Restoration 3: 205-210 Gibbons P and Lindenmayer DB (2002) 'Tree hollows and wildlife conservation in Australia.' (CSIRO Publishing: Melbourne) Gibbons P, Lindenmayer D, Fischer J, Manning A, Weinberg A, Seddon J, Ryan P and Barrett G (2008) The future of scattered trees in agricultural landscapes. Conservation Biology 22: 1309-1319. Greening Australia (2007) Land for Wildlife, Viewed on 6 July 2009 http://www.greeningaustralia.org.au/our- solutions/biodiversity/land-for-wildlife Grey MJ, Clarke MF and Loyn RH (1997) Initial changes in the avian communities of remnant eucalypt woodlands following a reduction in the abundance of Noisy Miners, Manorina melanocephala. Wildlife Research 24: 631-48. IPCC (2007) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Website, Viewed on 25 May 2009: www.ipcc.ch IUCN (2008) The 2008 Review of the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, Viewed on 25 May 2009 http://iucn.org/about/work/programmes/species/red_list/review/ Jenkins S (1996) Native vegetation on farms survey 1996. Resource Management Technical Report 164. National Research and Development Program on Rehabilitation Management and Conservation of Remnant Vegetation. Johnson RJ and Beck MM (1988) Influences of shelterbelts on wildlife management and biology. Agric. Ecosyst. Env. 22/23: 301-35. Kalcounis-Rüppell MJ, Pysllakis JM and Brigham RM (2006) Tree roost selection by bats: an empirical synthesis using metadata-analysis. Wildlife Society Bulletin 33: 1123-1132. Keith DA (2004) Ocean shores to desert dunes: The native vegetation of New South Wales and the ACT. NSW Department of Environment and Conservation, Sydney. Killey P (2008) Modelling the volume of fallen branch debris in Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodlands. Notes from the Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment Workshop. August 7-8, 2008. Langford CM, Simpson PC, Garden DL, Eddy DA, Keys MJ, Rehwinkel R and Johnston WH (2004) Managing native pastures for agriculture and conservation NSW Department of Primary Industries. Law B, Chidel M and Turner G (2000) The use by wildlife of paddock trees in farmland. Pacific Conservation Biology 6:130-143..
63 Lindenmayer DB, Claridge AW, Hazell D, Michael DR, Crane M, MacGregor CI and Cunningham RB (2003) Wildlife on farms: how to conserve native animals. CSIRO Publishing, Melbourne. Lindenmayer DB, Cunningham RB, Nix HA, Tanton MT and Smith AP (1991a) Predicting the abundance of hollow-bearing trees in montane forests of southeastern Australia. Australian Journal of Ecology 16, 91-98. Lindenmayer DB, Margules CR and Botkin D (2000) Indicators of forest sustainability biodiversity: The selection of forest indicator species. Conservation Biology 14: 941-950. Lindsay E (2008) Leaf Litter Invertebrates and Leaf Litter Decay within Woodland Remnants. In Woodland Wanderings: Newsletter of the Grassy Box Woodlands Conservation Management Network. Vol 6 / Issue 1. Autumn 2008. Lindsay E and Cunningham S (2009a) Land use effects on soil nutrient enrichment: risks for weed invasion. CSIRO for Land & Water Australia. Lindsay EA and Cunningham SA (2009b) Livestock grazing exclusion and microhabitat variation affect invertebrates and litter decomposition rates in woodland remnants. Forest Ecology and Management 258: 178-187. Loyn RH (1987) Effects of patch area on bird abundances, species numbers and tree health in fragmented Victorian forests. In Nature Conservation: The Role of Remnants of Native Vegetation. Eds. Saunders DA, Burbridge AA, Arnold GW and Hopkins AJM. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Sydney Loyn RH (1991) Effects of patch area and habitat on bird abundances, species numbers and trees health in fragmented Victorian forests. Proc. Ecol. Soc. Aust. 16: 65-77. Lumsden LF and Bennet AF (2005) Scattered trees in rural landscapes: foraging habitat for insectivorous bats in south-eastern Australia. Biological Conservation 122: 205-222. Lunt ID, Eldridge DJ, Morgan JW and Witt GB (2007) Turner Review No.13. A framework to predict the effects of livestock grazing and grazing exclusion on conservation values in natural ecosystems in Australia. Australian Journal of Botany 55: 401-415. Mac Nally R, Bennett AF, Thomas JR, Radford JQ, Unmack G, Horrocks G and Vesk PA. (2009) Collapse of an avifauna: climate change appears to exacerbate habitat loss and degradation. Diversity and Distribution 15: 720-730. Martin TJ and Major (2001) Changes in wolf spider (Aranea) assemblages across woodland-pasture boundaries in the central wheat-belt of New South Wales, Australia. Austral Ecology 26: 264-274. McIntyre S, McIvor JG and Heard KM (eds) (2002) Managing and Conserving Grassy Woodlands. CSIRO Collingwood, Vic. Montague-Drake R (2008) Wildlife on Farms in the South West Slopes. In Woodland Wanderings: Newsletter of the Grassy Box Woodlands Conservation Management Network. Vol 6 / Issue 1. Autumn 2008. Moore CWE (1953a) The vegetation of the south-eastern Riverina, New South Wales. I. The climax communities. Australian Journal of Botany 1: 485-547. Moore CWE (1953b) The vegetation of the south-eastern Riverina, New South Wales. II. The disclimax communities. Australian Journal of Botany 1: 548-567. Moore RM (1970) South eastern temperate woodlands and grasslands. In “Australian Grasslands.” Ed. Moore RM. pp. 169-190. Australian National University Press, Canberra. Morgan JW and Lunt ID (1999) Effects of time-since-fire on the tussock dynamics of a dominant grass (Themeda triandra) in a temperate Australian grassland. Biological Conservation 88: 379-386. Muyt A (2001) Bush Invaders of South East Australia. RG and FJ Richardson, Meredith, Vic Nadolny C, Ranclaud H, Whalley W, McLeish T, Wheeler J, Morsley R, Croft P, McCormick L, Ede A, Hawes W, Watson C and Austin J. (2003) Grassy Vegetation in North-western NSW and Guidelines for its Management and Conservation. Armidale Tree Group Incorporated, NSW. Nature Conservation Trust (2009) Nature Conservation Trust of New South Wales Website. Viewed on 1 Sept 2010. http://nct.org.au/ Nicolle D (1997) Eucalypts of South Australia. Lane Print Group, South Australia. NSW Scientific Committee (2002) White Box-Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland. Endangered Ecological Community Final Determination. NSW Dept of Environment and Climate Change.
64 Oliver I, Pearce S, Greenslade PJM and Britton DR (2006) Contribution of paddock trees to the conservation of terrestrial invertebrate biodiversity within grazed native pastures. Austral Ecology 31: 1-12 Oliver L, Rehwinkel R and McLeish T (2008) Possible Management Actions for Box Gum Woodlands. Appendix 3 Version 1-7 Threatened Species Assessment Tool. Department of Environment and Climate Change. Parsons WT and Cuthbertson EG (1992) Noxious weeds of Australia. Inkata Press, Melbourne. Peake, T.C. (2006) The Vegetation of the Central Hunter Valley, New South Wales. A Report on the Findings of the Hunter Rmant Vegetation Project. Hunter – Central Rivers Catchment Management Authority, Paterson. Prober SM (1996) Conservation of the Grassy White Box Woodlands: Rangewide Floristic Variation and Implementations for Reserve Design. Australian Journal of Botany 44: 57-77. Prober SM and Brown AHD (1994) Conservation of grassy box woodlands: population genetics and fragmentation of Eucalyptus albens. Conservation Biology 8: 1003-1013. Prober SM and Lunt ID (2009) Restoration of Themeda australis swards suppresses soil nitrate and enhances ecological resistance to invasion by exotic annuals. Biological Invasions 11: 171-181 Prober SM, Lunt ID and Thiele KR (2002) Determining reference conditions for management and restoration of temperate grassy woodlands: relationships among trees, topsoils and understorey flora in little grazed remnants. Australian Journal of Botany 50: 687-697. Prober SM, Lunt ID and Thiele KR (2008) Effects of fire frequency and mowing on a temperate, derived grassland soil in south-eastern Australia. International Journal of Wildland Fire 17:586-594 Prober SM and Thiele KR (1993) The ecology and genetics of remnant Grassy White Box Woodlands in relation to their conservation. Victorian Naturalist 110: 30-36. Prober SM and Thiele KR (1995) Conservation of the Grassy White Box Woodlands: Relative Contributions of Size and Disturbance to Floristic Composition and Diversity of Remnants. Australian Journal of Botany 43: 349-366. Prober SM and Thiele KR (2004) Floristic patterns along an east-west gradient in grassy box woodlands of Central New South Wales. Cunninghamia 8: 306-325. Prober SM and Thiele KR (2005) Restoring Australia’s temperate grasslands and grassy woodlands: integrating function and diversity. Ecological Management and Restoration 6: 16-27. Prober S, Thiele K and Higginson E (undated) Conserving Grassy Box Woodlands. Information Brochure. New Era Graphics. Prober SM, Thiele KR and Lunt ID (2002) Identifying ecological barriers to restoration in temperate grassy woodlands: soil changes associated with different degradation states. Australian Journal of Botany 50: 699-712. Prober SM, Thiele KR and Lunt ID (2007) Fire frequency regulates tussock grass composition, structure and resilience in endangered temperate woodlands. Austral Ecology 32(7): 808-24. Prober SM, Thiele KR, Lunt ID and Koen TB (2005) Restoring ecological function in temperate grassy woodlands: manipulating soil nutrients, exotic annuals and native perennial grasses through carbon supplements and spring burns. Journal of Applied Ecology 42: 1073-1085. Qld EPA (2008) Queensland Environment Protection Authority Website: http://www.epa.qld.gov.au/nature_conservation/nature_refuges/latest_nature_refuges/ Radford J and Bennett A (2007) The Relative Importance of Landscape Properties for Woodland Birds in Agricultural Environments, Journal of Applied Ecology, Vol 44, pp. 737-747, Blackwell Publishing, England. Reid JRW (1999) Threatened and Declining Birds in the New South Wales Sheep-wheat Belt: I: Diagnosis, Characteristics and Management. Consultancy report to NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service. CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology, Canberra. Reid JRW (2000) Threatened and Declining Birds in the New South Wales Sheep-wheat Belt: II: Landscape relationships – modelling bird atlas data against vegetation cover. Consultancy report to NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service. CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology, Canberra..
65 Saunders DA (1994) The effects of habitat reduction and fragmentation on the mammals and birds of the Western Australian wheatbelt: lessons for western New South Wales. In Future of the Fauna of Western New South Wales. Eds: Lunney D, Hand S, Reed P and Butcher D. Royal Zoological Society of New South Wales, Mosman. Seddon JA, Briggs SV and Doyle SJ (2003) Relationships between bird species and characteristics of woodland remnants in Central New South Wales. Pacific Conservation Biology 9: 95-119. Seddon JA, Zerger A, Doyle SJ and Briggs SV (2007) The extent of dryland salinity in remnant woodland and forest within agricultural landscape. Australian Journal of Biology 55: 533-540. Sharp S, Dorrough J, Rehwinkel R, Eddy D, and Breckwoldt A (2005) Grassy Ecosystems Management Kit: A guide to Developing Conservation Management Plans. Environment ACT, Canberra. Shelly D (2005)'Hollow occurrence in selected trees of the central west catchment of New South Wales.' Department of Infrastructure, Planning and Natural Resources, Dubbo, NSW. Smallbone LD, Prober SM and Lunt ID (2007) Restoration treatments enhance early establishment of native forbs in a degraded temperate grassy woodland. Journal of Botany 55(8): 818-830. Spark P and Nadolny C (2004) Flora and Fauna Impact Assessment of Coolatai Grass (Hyparrhenia hirta) Invasion. In Woodland Wanderings: Newsletter of the Grassy Box Woodlands Conservation Management Network. Vol 3 / Issue 2. Autumn 2004. Specht RL (1981) Conservation of vegetation types. In Australian Vegetation. HR Groves (ed) pp 394-410. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Spooner P, Lunt I and Robinson W (2002) Is fencing enough? The short-term effects of stock exclusion in remnant grassy woodlands in southern NSW. Ecological Management & Restoration 3(2):117-126. Stuwe J and Parson RF (1977) Themeda australis grasslands on the basalt plains, Victoria: Floristics and management effects. Australian Journal of Ecology 2: 467-76. Thomas V, Gellie N and Harrison T (2000) Forest ecosystem classification and mapping for the Southern CRA region. Vol 2 Appendices. NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service Southern Directorate. A report for the NSW CRA/RFA Steering Committee. Titcumb M (Ed) (2002) Managing your patch of bush. Department Natural Resources and Environment, Wodonga. Tremont R (2005) Does Remnant Fencing Work? Evaluation of Outcomes of Fencing Areas of Native Vegetation on the NSW Northern Tablelands. Report for Citizens Wildlife Corridors, Armidale. TSSC (2006) Advice to The Minister for the Environment and Heritage from the Threatened Species Scientific Committee (TSSC) on Amendments to the List of Ecological Communities under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). Department of Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts Website, Viewed on 25 May 2009 http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/threatened/communities/pubs/box-gum.pdf Upjohn B, Fenton G and Conyers M (2005) Soil acidity and liming. Agfact AC.19, 3rd Edition. NSW Department of Primary Industries http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/167209/soil- acidity-liming.pdf Viewed on 20 July 2010 Yates CJ and Hobbs RJ (1997) Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands: a review of their status, processes threatening their persistence and techniques for restoration. Australian Journal of Botany 45: 949-973. Yates CJ and Hobbs RJ (1999) Temperate eucalypt woodlands in Australia- an overview. In Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia. Hobbs RJ and Yates CJ (eds). pp 1-5. Surrey Beattie and Sons, Chipping Norton. Walker J and Hopkins MS (1990) Vegetation. In Australian Soil and Land Survey Field Handbook. McDonald RC, Isbell RF, Speight JG, Walker J and Hopkins MS. 2nd Ed. Inkata Press. Walter K and Schelling K (2004) Remote sensing mapping of grassy ecosystems in the Monaro. Report to the NSW Department of Environment and Conservation, Queanbeyan. Walter K and Schelling K (2005) Remote sensing mapping of grassy ecosystems in the upper catchment of the Shoalhaven River (Southern tablelands section): Report to the NSW Department of Environment and Conservation, Queanbeyan..
66 Wells TCE (1969) Botanic aspects of conservation management of chalk grasslands. Biological Conservation 2, 36-44, cited in Lunt ID (1991) Management of remnant lowland grasslands and grassy woodlands for nature conservation: a review. Victorian Naturalist 3: 56-66. Wilson B (2002) Influence of scattered paddock trees on surface soil properties: A study of the Northern Tablelands of NSW. Ecological Management and Restoration 3: 211-219. Windsor DM (1999) A review of factors affecting regeneration of box woodlands in the Central Tablelands of New South Wales. In Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia: Biology, Conservation, Management and Restoration. Eds. R. J. Hobbs and C. J. pp 271-85. Yates. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton..
67 Appendix 1: Important Species for Box-Gum Grassy Woodland 1 This species list identifies selected important plant species found in the White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland 2 ecological community listed under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 that indicate that the community is in good condition. The 3 species list was developed to complement the Listing Information Guide, and should be read in that context (Rehwinkel unpublished; Nadolny unpublished). Note 4 that some species are useful indicators for only part of the range of the ecological community and this is indicated where possible. Further work is required to 5 develop indicator lists for each IBRA region. 6 7 SCIENTIFIC NAME SYNONYM COMMON NAME REGION FERNS Cheilanthes distans Bristly Cloak Fern Southern NSW indicator GRASSES Cymbopogon refractus Barbed Wire Grass Dichanthium sericeum Queensland Blue-grass Dichanthium setosum Northern NSW indicator Digitaria porrecta Finger Panic Grass Northern NSW indicator Eulalia aurea (Bory) Kunth Northern NSW indicator Sorghum leiocladum Wild Sorghum Themeda australis (Themeda triandra) Kangaroo Grass HERBS Ajuga australis Australian Bugle, Austral Bugle Southern NSW indicator Ammobium craspedioides Yass Daisy Arachnorchis spp. Spider Orchids Arthropodium milleflorum Vanilla-lily, Pale Vanilla-lily Arthropodium minus Small Vanilla Lily Asperula conferta Common Woodruff Southern NSW indicator Asperula scoparia Prickly Woodruff Brachyscome diversifolia (Brachycome diversifolia) Large-headed Daisy Brachyscome graminea (Brachycome graminea) Grass Dairy Brachyscome multifida (Brachycome multifida) Cut-leaved Daisy Brachyscome rigidula (Brachycome rigidula) Leafy Daisy Brachyscome spathulata (Brachycome spathulata) Spoon Daisy Brunonia australis Pincushion, Blue Pincushion Bulbine bulbosa Bulbine Lily, Native Onion, Native Leek, Golden Lily Bulbine glauca Rock Lily.
68 SCIENTIFIC NAME SYNONYM COMMON NAME REGION Burchardia umbellata Milkmaids Caesia calliantha Blue Grass-Lily Calocephalus citreus Lemon Beauty-heads Calochilus robertsonii Purplish Beard Orchid Calochilus spp. Beard Orchids Calotis scabiosifolia var integrifolia Rough Burr-daisy Chrysocephalum apiculatum Yellow Buttons, Common Everlasting Chrysocephalum semipapposum Clustered Everlasting, Yellow Buttons Craspedia variabilis Billy Buttons Desmodium brachypodum Large Tick-trefoil Desmodium varians Slender Tick-trefoil Southern NSW indicator Dianella longifolia Smooth Flax Lily Dianella revoluta Blueberry Lily, Black-Anther Flax-Lily, Spreading Flax-Lily, Blue Flax-Lily Dichopogon fimbriatus Chocolate Lily, Nodding Chocolate Lily Dipodium punctatum Hyacinth Orchid, Pink Hyacinth Orchid Diuris chryseopsis Common Golden Moths, Small Snake Orchid Diuris dendrobioides Long-tail Purple Diuris, Wedge Diuris Diuris maculata Leopard Orchid, Nanny Goats, Leopard Diuris, Spotted Double- tail Diuris punctata Purple Donkey-orchid, Purple Double-tails, Purple Diuris, Purple Cowslip, Dotted Double tails Diuris semilunulata (Diuris maculata) Donkey-ears Diuris sulphurea Tiger Orchid, Hornet Orchid Eriochilus cucullatus Parson's Bands Eryngium ovinum (Eryngium rostratum) Blue Devil Galium gaudichaudii Rough Bedstraw.
69 SCIENTIFIC NAME SYNONYM COMMON NAME REGION Genoplesium spp. Midge Orchids Glycine clandestina Twining Glycine Glycine tabacina Glycine Pea, Variable Glycine Goodenia hederacea Forest Goodenia, Ivy Goodenia Southern NSW indicator Goodenia pinnatifida Scrambled Eggs, Cut-leaf Goodenia Hymenochilus bicolor (Pterostylis bicolor) Bicolor Greenhood Hymenochilus cycnocephalus (Pterostylis cycnocephala) Swan Greenhood Hymenochilus muticus (Pterostylis mutica) Midget Greenhood, Blunt Greenhood, Dwarf Greenhood Hypericum gramineum Small St John's Wort Isoetopsis graminifolia Grass Cushion Laxmannia gracilis Slender Wire-Lily Leptorhynchos elongatus (Leptorhynchus elongatus) Lanky Buttons, Hairy Buttons Leptorhynchos squamatus (Conyza squamata, Chrysocoma squamata, Leptorhynchus squamatus) Scaly Buttons Leucochrysum albicans Hoary Sunray Linum marginale Wild Flax, Native Flax Lotus australis Austral Trefoil, Australian Trefoil Microseris lanceolata Yam Daisy, Murnong Microtis parviflora Slender Onion Orchid Microtis unifolia Common Onion Orchid, Onion Orchid Oreomyrrhis eriopoda Australian Carraway Plantago gaudichaudii Narrow-leaf Native Plantain, Narrow Plantain Plantago varia Variable Plantain, Small Plantain, Sagoweed Podolepis jaceoides Showy Copper-wire Daisy Polygala japonica Dwarf Milkwort Poranthera microphylla Small Poranthera, Small-leaved Poranthera Southern NSW indicator Prasophyllum petilum Tarengo Leek Orchid Prasophyllum spp. Leek Orchids Ptilotus spp. Hairy Tails, Hairy Heads.
70 SCIENTIFIC NAME SYNONYM COMMON NAME REGION Ranunculus lappaceus Common Buttercup, Australian Buttercup Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides Button Wrinklewort Rutidosis multiflora Small Wrinklewort Sebaea ovata Yellow Centaury Sida corrugata Corrugated Sida Southern NSW indicator Stackhousia monogyna Creamy Candles, Creamy Stackhousia Stylidium graminifolium Grass Trigger-plant Stypandra glauca Nodding Blue Lily Swainsona galegifolia Smooth Darling Pea Swainsona oroboides Variable Swainson-pea Swainsona queenslandica Smooth Darling Pea Swainsona recta Mountain Swainson-pea, Small Purple-pea Swainsona reticulata Kneed Swainson-pea Swainsona sericea Silky Swainson-pea Thelymitra malvina Mauve-tuft Sun-orchid, Sun- orchid Thelymitra pauciflora Slender Sun-orchid, Few- flowered Sun-orchid Thelymitra rubra Pink Sun-orchid, Salmon Sun- orchid, Red Sun-orchid Thysanotus patersonii Twining Fringe-lily Thysanotus tuberosus Common Fringe-lily Tricoryne elatior Yellow Rush-lily, Yellow Autumn- lily Triptilodiscus pygmaeus (Helipterum australe) Austral Sunray, Common Sunray Velleia paradoxa Spur Velleia Viola betonicifolia Showy Violet, Arrow-head Violet, Native Violet, Purple Violet Southern NSW indicator Wurmbea dioica (Anguillaria dioica) Early Nancy Zornia dyctiocarpa Zornia SHRUBS Acacia decora Western Silver Wattle, Showy Wattle, Western Golden Wattle, Southern and eastern NSW indicator Acacia genistifolia Spreading Wattle, Early Wattle,.
71 SCIENTIFIC NAME SYNONYM COMMON NAME REGION Wild Irishman Astroloma humifusum Native Cranberry, Cranberry Heath Bossiaea buxifolia Box-leaved Bitter-pea Bossiaea prostrata Creeping Bossiaea, Prostrate Bitter-pea Daviesia genistifolia Spiny Bitter-pea, Broom Bitter- pea Daviesia latifolia Hop Bitter-pea Daviesia leptophylla (Daviesia virgata) Narrow-leaf Bitter-pea Daviesia mimosoides Narrow-leaf Bitter-pea Dillwynia cinerascens Grey Parrot-pea Dillwynia retorta Heathy Parrot-pea Dillwynia sericea Showy Parrot-pea Exocarpos strictus Pale Ballart, Pale-fruit Ballart, Dwarf Cherry Gompholobium huegelii Pale Wedge-pea Grevillea iaspicula Wee Jasper Grevillea Grevillea lanigera Woolly Grevillea Grevillea ramosissima Fan Grevillea, Branching Grevillea, Prickly Parsley Bush Grevillea rosmarinifolia Rosemary Grevillea Grevillea wilkinsonii Tumut Grevillea Hardenbergia violacea False Sarsaparilla, Purple Coral- pea, Native Lilac Hibbertia calycina Lesser Guinea-flower Hibbertia riparia (Hibbertia stricta) Stream Guinea-flower, Erect Guinea-flower Hovea linearis Creeping Hovea Indigofera adesmiifolia Tick Indigo, Leafless Indigo, Broad-leaved Indigo Indigofera australis Austral Indigo, Australian Indigo, Native Indigo, Hill Indigo Jacksonia scoparia Winged Broom-pea, Dogwood, Broom Lespedeza juncea Perennial Lespedeza Leucopogon fletcheri Pendant Beard Heath.
72 SCIENTIFIC NAME SYNONYM COMMON NAME REGION Leucopogon fraseri Beard Heath Leucopogon virgatus Common Beard Heath Pimelea curviflora Curved Rice-flower Pimelea glauca Shrubby Rice-flower Pultenaea microphylla Spreading Bush-pea Pultenaea procumbens Heathy Bush-pea Pultenaea spinosa (Pultenaea cunninghamii) Bush-pea Pultenaea subspicata Low Bush-pea Templetonia stenophylla Leafy Templetonia, Leafy Mallee-pea.
73 Appendix 2: Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Identification Flowchart Updated from: DEH (2006) White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodlands and derived grasslands. EPBC Act Policy Statement. Department of the Environment and Heritage. The flowchart below represents the lowest condition at which patches are included in the listed ecological community. This is not the ideal state of the ecological community. Large patches, those that link remnants in the landscape, those that occur in highly cleared areas, those that contain rare, declining or threatened species, and those that represent the entire range of the ecological community, are important for the long-term future of the ecological community. Determining if your land has an area of the listed ecological community 1 These dominant species may include hybrids with any other Eucalyptus species. 2 Patch – a patch is a continuous area containing the ecological community (areas of other ecological communities such as woodlands dominated by other species are not included in a patch). In determining patch size it is important to know what is, and is not, included within any individual patch. The patch is the larger of: • an area that contains five or more trees in which no tree is greater than 75 m from another tree, or • the area over which the understorey is predominantly native. 3 A predominantly native ground layer is one where at least 50 per cent of the perennial vegetation cover in the ground layer is made up of native species. The best time of the year to determine this is late autumn when the annual species have died back and have not yet started to regrow. 4 Mature trees are trees with a circumference of at least 125 cm at 130 cm above the ground. 5 Natural regeneration of the dominant overstorey eucalypts occurs when there are mature trees plus regenerating trees of at least 15 cm circumference at 130 cm above the ground. Is, or was previously, at least one of the most common overstorey species White Box, Yellow Box or Blakely’s Red Gum (or Western Grey box or Coastal Grey Box in the Nandewar Bioregion)? YES NO Not the listed ecological community Is the patch 0.1 ha (1000 m2) or greater in size? NO YES Not the listed ecological community YES Does the patch1 have a predominantly native ground layer2? NO Does the patch have an average of 20 or more mature trees per hectare3, or is there natural regeneration of the dominant overstorey eucalypts4? There are 12 or more native understorey species present within the patch (excluding grasses). There must be at least one important species.* * see http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/box-gum.html for the list of species. YES NO The listed ecological community Is the patch 2 ha or greater in size? NO YES The listed ecological community Not the listed ecological community YES NO Please note: To begin the assessment of criteria relating to the understorey, apply this flowchart to areas of your patch that contain the most native species in the ground layer. Not the listed ecological community Not the listed ecological community Is, or was previously, the most common overstorey species White Box and/or Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (and/or Western Grey box and/or Coastal Grey Box in the Nandewar Bioregion)1? YES NO Not the listed ecological community Is the patch 0.1 ha (1000 m2) or greater in size? NO YES Not the listed ecological community YES Does the patch2 have a predominantly native ground layer3? NO Does the patch have an average of 20 or more mature trees per hectare4, or is there natural regeneration of the dominant overstorey eucalypts5? There are 12 or more native understorey species present within the patch (excluding grasses). There must be at least one important species.* * see http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/box-gum.html for the list of species. YES NO The listed ecological community Is the patch 2 ha or greater in size? NO YES The listed ecological community Not the listed ecological community YES NO Please note: To begin the assessment of criteria relating to the understorey, apply this flowchart to areas of your patch that contain the most native species in the ground layer. Not the listed ecological community Not the listed ecological community.
74 Appendix 3: Box-Gum Grassy Woodland State and Transition Model Reference: Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts (2008b), Caring for our Country - Environmental Stewardship - Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Project Implementation Plan.
75 Appendix 4: Estimated Distribution of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Remnants.
76.
77.
78.
79 Appendix 5: Full Key/Potentially Threatening Process Listing for Introduced Animal Pest Species  Goats “Competition and land degradation by feral goats” (EPBC Act) “Competition and habitat degradation by feral goats, Capris hircus” (TSC Act)  Rabbits “Competition and land degradation by feral rabbits” (EPBC Act) “Competition and grazing by the feral European rabbit” (TSC Act) “Reduction in biomass and biodiversity of native vegetation through grazing by the rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus” (FFG Act)  Bees “Competition from feral honeybees” (TSC Act) “Introduction of the Large Earth Bumblebee Bombus terrestris” (TSC Act) “The introduction and spread of the Large Earth Bumblebee Bombus terrestris into Victorian terrestrial environments” (FFG Act) “Threats to native flora and fauna arising from the use by the feral honeybee Apis mellifera of nesting hollows and floral resources” (FFG Act)  Deer “Herbivory and environmental degradation caused by feral deer” (TSC Act) “Reduction in biodiversity of native vegetation by Sambar (Cervus unicolor)” (FFG Act)  Pigs “Predation, habitat degradation, competition and disease transmission by feral pigs (Sus scrofa)” ( TSC Act) “Predation, habitat degradation, competition and disease transmission by feral pigs” (EPBC Act)  European Fox Predation by the European Red Fox Vulpes vulpes (TSC Act) Predation by the European Red Fox (Vulpes vulpes) (EPBC Act) Predation of native wildlife by the introduced Red Fox (Vulpes vulpes) (FFG Act)  Cats “Predation by the Feral Cat Felis catus (TSC Act). “Predation by feral Cats” (EPBC Act) “Predation of native wildlife by the cat, Felis catus” (FFG Act)..
80 Appendix 6: Estimated Extent and Broad Clearing Estimates of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland Mapping Data Sources: ACT Government (2004) Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. Action Plan No. 27. Environment ACT, Canberra. Austin MP, Cawsey EM, Baker BL, Yialeloglou MM, Grice DJ and Briggs SV (2002) Predicted Vegetation Cover in Central Lachlan Region. Final Report of the Natural Heritage Trust Project AA 1368.97. CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology, Canberra. CRA Unit, Northern Zone NPWS (1999) Forest Ecosystem Classification and Mapping for Upper and Lower North East CRA Regions. A project undertaken for the Joint Commonwealth NSW Regional Forest Agreement Steering Committee as part of the NSW Comprehensive Regional Assessments project number NA35/EH. Department of Sustainability and Environment Ecological Vegetation Class Mapping, DSE Corporate Data Library. Environment Protection Agency (2003) Regional Ecosystem Description Database (REDD) Version 3.2. NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service (2000) Nandewar Draft Bioregional Scoping Study. Priday SD (2005) The Native Vegetation of the NSW South Western Slopes Bioregion (within the Lachlan, Murrumbidgee and Murray Catchments). Priday SD and Mulvaney M (2004) DRAFT REPORT The Native Vegetation and Threatened Species of the City of Wagga Wagga. Department of Environment and Conservation, NSW. Priday S, Mulvaney M, Gellie N and Hudson K (2002) The Native Vegetation of the Boorowa Shire. NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service. Seddon J, Briggs S. and Doyle S (2002) Little River Catchment Biodiversity Assessment. A report for the TARGET project. Thomas V, Gellie N. and Harrison T (2000) Forest ecosystem classification and mapping for the Southern CRA region, Volume II Appendices. NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service, Southern Directorate. A report undertaken for the NSW CRA/RFA Steering Committee..
81 Appendix 7: Conservation Reserves Known to Contain Box- Gum Grassy Woodland ACT Goorooyaroo Nature Reserve Gungaderra Nature Reserve Mt Majura Nature Reserve Mt Painter Nature Reserve Mt Pinnacle Nature Reserve Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve NEW SOUTH WALES Alma Nature Reserve Bangadilly National Park Barayamal National Park Barton Nature Reserve Benambra National Park Beni Community Conservation Area Zone 3 Boginderra Hills Nature Reserve Border Ranges National Park Borenore Karst Conservation Area Breelong Community Conservation Area Zone 1National Park Brindabella National Park Bungonia State Conservation Area Conimbla National Park Copeton Waters State Park Cuumbeun Nature Reserve Dananbilla Nature Reserve Drillwarrina Community Conservation Area Zone 1National Park Ellerslie Nature Reserve Flagstaff Memorial Nature Reserve Goobang National Park Goonoowigall Community Conservation Area Goonoowigall Community Conservation Area Goulburn River National Park Gunyerwarildi Community Conservation Area Zone 1 Gungewalla Nature Reserve Illunie Nature Reserve Koorawatha Nature Reserve Livingstone National Park Minjary National Park Mogriguy Community Conservation Area Zone 1 Mount Kaputar National Park Oak Creek Nature Reserve Oxley Wild Rivers National Park Queanbeyan Nature Reserve Stony Creek Nature Reserve Terry Hie Hie Community Conservation Area Zone 2 Towarri National Park.
82 Tumblong State Conservation Area Warrumbungle National Park Wollemi National Park Wongarbon Nature Reserve Woomargama National Park Yerranderrie State Conservation Area QUEENSLAND Arcot State Forest Bringalily State Forest Broadwater State Forest Bunya Mountains National Park Claremont State Forest Coolmunda Conservation Park Durikai State Forest Gambubal State Forest Girraween National Park Googa State Forest Greenup State Forest Gunyan State Forest Imbil State Forest 1 Lamington National Park Leyburn State Forest Macintyre State Forest Main Range National Park Mount Beau Brummell Conservation Park Mount Binga State Forest Passchendaele State Forest Pidna National Park Pidna State Forest Sundown National Park Sundown Resources Reserve Talgai State Forest Tamborine Forest Reserve Tamborine National Park Terrica State Forest Texas State Forest 1 Texas State Forest 2 Texas State Forest 3 Yelarbon State Forest Yarraman State Forest VICTORIA – currently under review. This is not a comprehensive list but shows examples of reserves containing the community. Balmattum Nature Conservation Reserve Bonegilla White Box Bushland Reserve Broken Boosey State Park and Natural Features Reserve Chiltern-Mt Pilot National Park Dookie Bushland Reserve Mt Franklin Scenic Reserve Runnymeade Flora and Fauna Reserve Snowy River National Park.
83 Wises Creek Flora Reserve.
84 Appendix 8: Remnants of Box-Gum Grassy Woodland on the Register of the National Estate NEW SOUTH WALES Bala Travelling Stock Route Remnant Vegetation Site – Boorowa Canowindra General Cemetery Woodland Remnant - Canowindra Currabubula Cemetery Woodland Remnant - Currabubula, Dananbilla Nature Reserve Monteagle Cemetery Woodland Remnant - Monteagle Oxley Park -Tamworth Poplars Rutidosis Site - Jerrabomberra Rutidosis Site - Queanbeyan West Somerton Road Travelling Stock Route (part) - Manilla Tarcutta Hills Woodland Remnant - Tarcutta Tralee - Williamsdale Railway Swainsona Recta Sites - Williamsdale Wallabadah Cemetery and Common Woodland Remnant - Wallabadah Winton Cemetery Woodland Remnant - Tamworth Woodstock Cemetery Woodland Remnant - Woodstock VICTORIA Puckapunyal Military Area.
State Pre-1750 Area] _% cleared (ha) [Queensland 285,662 7 jew South Wales 3,717,366 93 |Australian Capital Territory 32,000 66 Victoria 976,627 94 TOTAL 5,011,655 9.
2017 Woodland Quality and Extent Mapping – ACT Government Environmental Offsets May 2018 Prepared for Environmental Offsets, ACT Parks and Conservation Service.
Capital Ecology Pty Ltd PO Box 854 ACN: 607 364 358 Phone: 0412 474 415 Gungahlin ACT 2912 ABN: 50 607 364 358 Email: admin@capitalecology.com.au www.capitalecology.com.au ii Document Information Report for: ACT Parks and Conservation Service Prepared by: Sam Reid & Robert Speirs Capital Ecology project no.: 2756 Citation: Capital Ecology (2018). 2017 Woodland Quality and Extent Mapping – ACT Government Environmental Offsets. May 2018. Prepared for Environmental Offsets, ACT Parks and Conservation Service. Authors: S. Reid and R. Speirs. Project no. 2756. Version Control Version Internal reviewer External reviewer Date of issue Draft version 01 Robert Speirs Melita Milner 18-04-2018 Final version 01 Robert Speirs - 03-05-2018 Acknowledgements Capital Ecology gratefully acknowledges the contributions and/or assistance of the following people and organisations in undertaking this study. • PCS Environmental Offsets – Melita Milner, Clare McInnes, Sophia Callander, and Nic Mikhailovich. • Lessees of privately leased properties. Disclaimer Capital Ecology Pty Ltd has undertaken the supporting studies and developed this document, including any assessment/s provided herein, in accordance with the relevant Commonwealth, State/Territory and local legislation and current industry best practice. This document does not provide legal or investment advice. Capital Ecology Pty Ltd accepts no liability for any damages or loss of any type incurred as a result of reliance placed upon the content of this document for any purpose other than that for which it was expressly intended. © Capital Ecology Pty Ltd This document is and shall remain the property of Capital Ecology Pty Ltd. This document may be used solely for the purposes for which it was commissioned and only by those parties for whom it is intended. Use of this document in any form other than that authorised is prohibited..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 iii Table of Contents 1 Introduction .................................................................................................. 7 2 Methods ...................................................................................................... 10 2.1 Four-step temperate vegetation mapping method ................................................. 10 2 .1.2 2 .1.3 2 .1.4 2 .1.5 3 Results......................................................................................................... 21 3.1 Horsepark North ...................................................................................................... 21 3.1.1 Woodland mapping results3.1.1 3 .1.2 3.2 Isaacs Ridge .............................................................................................................. 32 3.2.2 Woodland mapping results3.2.2 3 .2.3 3.3 Kenny Broadacre ...................................................................................................... 38 3.3.2 Woodland mapping results3.3.2 3 .3.3 3.4 Kinlyside ................................................................................................................... 48 3.4.2 Woodland mapping results3.4.2 3 .4.3 3.5 Kenny Woodland ...................................................................................................... 64 3.5.2 Woodland mapping results3.5.2 3 .5.3 3.6 Taylor ....................................................................................................................... 74 3.6.2 Woodland mapping results3.6.2 3 .6.3 3.7 Throsby East ............................................................................................................. 86 3.7.2 Woodland mapping results3.7.2 3 .7.3 3.8 Throsby North .......................................................................................................... 96 3.8.2 Woodland mapping results3.8.2 3 .8.3.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 iv 3.9 The Pinnacle ........................................................................................................... 107 3.9.2 Woodland mapping results3.9.2 3 .9.3 3.10 Watson Woodland ................................................................................................. 117 3.10.2 Woodland mapping results3.10.2 3 .10.3 4 Summary and Conclusion .......................................................................... 123 References ......................................................................................................... 127 Appendices ........................................................................................................ 129 Appendix 1. Plot Data Summary Tables............................................................................... 130 Appendix 2. Step-Point Transect Data Summary Table ....................................................... 142 Appendix 3. PCS Excel Spreadsheets (excel files in separate .zip folder) ............................ 146 Appendix 4. GIS Data (shapefiles in separate .zip folder) .................................................... 147 List of Figures Figure 2.1-a. Locality Plan ...................................................................................................................... 9 Figure 3.1-a. Horsepark North Vegetation Mapping Results .............................................................. 30 Figure 3.1-b. Horsepark North EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ........................ 31 Figure 3.2-a. Isaacs Ridge Vegetation Mapping Results ..................................................................... 36 Figure 3.2-b. Isaacs Ridge EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ................................ 37 Figure 3.3-a. Kenny Broadacre Vegetation Mapping Results ............................................................. 46 Figure 3.3-b. Kenny Broadacre EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ........................ 47 Figure 3.4-a. Kinlyside Vegetation Mapping Results........................................................................... 62 Figure 3.4-b. Kinlyside EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ..................................... 63 Figure 3.5-a. Kenny Woodland Vegetation Mapping Results ............................................................. 72 Figure 3.5-b. Kenny Woodland EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ........................ 73 Figure 3.6-a. Taylor Vegetation Mapping Results ............................................................................... 84 Figure 3.6-b. Taylor EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification .......................................... 85 Figure 3.7-a. Throsby East Vegetation Mapping Results .................................................................... 94 Figure 3.7-b. Throsby East EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ............................... 95 Figure 3.8-a. Throsby North Vegetation Mapping Results................................................................ 105 Figure 3.8-b. Throsby North EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification .......................... 106 Figure 3.9-a. The Pinnacle Vegetation Mapping Results .................................................................. 115 Figure 3.9-b. The Pinnacle EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ............................. 116 Figure 3.10-a. Watson Woodland Vegetation Mapping Results ...................................................... 121.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 v Figure 3.10-b. Watson Woodland EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification ................. 122 List of Tables Table 2.1-a. Vegetation zones for PCT ACT16 ..................................................................................... 12 Table 2.1-b. Vegetation zones for PCT ACT25 ..................................................................................... 13 Table 2.1-c. Reason for Exotic Dominance .......................................................................................... 14 Table 2.1-d. Survey dates and plot-transect numbers per vegetation zone (PCTs combined) ......... 17 Table 2.1-e. Summary of assessment of vegetation zone characteristics against the listing criteria for EPBC Act Box-Gum Woodland........................................................................................................ 18 Table 3.1-a. Horsepark North ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ........................................................... 23 Table 3.1-b. Horsepark North ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ........................................................ 24 Table 3.1-c. Horsepark North ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ......................................................... 25 Table 3.1-d. Horsepark North ACT025 Zone 1 results summary ........................................................ 26 Table 3.1-e. Horsepark North ACT025 Zone 4 results summary ......................................................... 27 Table 3.2-a. Isaacs Ridge ACT16 Zone 1 results summary .................................................................. 33 Table 3.2-b. Isaacs Ridge ACT16 Zone 6 results summary .................................................................. 34 Table 3.3-a. Kenny Broadacre ACT16 Zone 2 results summary .......................................................... 39 Table 3.3-b. Kenny Broadacre ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ........................................................ 40 Table 3.3-c. Kenny Broadacre ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ........................................................ 41 Table 3.3-d. Kenny Broadacre ACT025 Zone 2 results summary ........................................................ 42 Table 3.3-e. Kenny Broadacre ACT025 Zone 5 results summary ........................................................ 43 Table 3.4-a. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ....................................................................... 50 Table 3.4-b. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ....................................................................... 51 Table 3.4-c. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 4 results summary ........................................................................ 52 Table 3.4-d. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 5 results summary ....................................................................... 53 Table 3.4-e. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 6 results summary ....................................................................... 54 Table 3.4-f. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 1 results summary ........................................................................ 55 Table 3.4-g. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 2 results summary ........................................................................ 56 Table 3.4-h. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 4 results summary ....................................................................... 57 Table 3.4-i. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 6 results summary ........................................................................ 58 Table 3.4-j. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 8 results summary ........................................................................ 59 Table 3.5-a. Kenny Woodland ACT16 Zone 2 results summary .......................................................... 65 Table 3.5-b. Kenny Woodland ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ........................................................ 66 Table 3.5-c. Kenny Woodland ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ........................................................ 67 Table 3.5-d. Kenny Woodland ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ........................................................ 68 Table 3.5-e. Kenny Broadacre ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ........................................................ 69.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 vi Table 3.6-a. Taylor ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ............................................................................ 75 Table 3.6-b. Taylor ACT016 Zone 4 results summary .......................................................................... 76 Table 3.6-c. Taylor ACT016 Zone 6 results summary .......................................................................... 77 Table 3.6-d. Taylor ACT025 Zone 1 results summary .......................................................................... 78 Table 3.6-e. Taylor ACT025 Zone 4 results summary .......................................................................... 79 Table 3.6-f. Taylor ACT25 Zone 7 results summary ............................................................................. 80 Table 3.6-g. Taylor ACT25 Zone 8 results summary ............................................................................ 81 Table 3.7-a. Throsby East ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ................................................................. 87 Table 3.7-b. Throsby East ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ............................................................... 88 Table 3.7-c. Throsby East ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ................................................................ 89 Table 3.7-d. Throsby East ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ............................................................... 90 Table 3.7-e. Throsby East ACT025 Zone 2 results summary ............................................................... 91 Table 3.8-a. Throsby North ACT16 Zone 1 results summary .............................................................. 97 Table 3.8-b. Throsby North ACT16 Zone 2 results summary .............................................................. 98 Table 3.8-c. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ............................................................. 99 Table 3.8-d. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 5 results summary .......................................................... 100 Table 3.8-e. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 6 results summary .......................................................... 101 Table 3.8-f. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ........................................................... 102 Table 3.9-a. The Pinnacle ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ............................................................... 108 Table 3.9-b. The Pinnacle ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ............................................................... 109 Table 3.9-c. The Pinnacle ACT016 Zone 4 results summary .............................................................. 110 Table 3.9-d. The Pinnacle ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ............................................................. 111 Table 3.9-e. The Pinnacle ACT025 Zone 1 results summary ............................................................. 112 Table 3.10-a. Watson Woodland ACT016 Zone 2 results summary ................................................. 118 Table 4-a. Summary of the areas of EPBC Act BGW structural woodland and derived grassland .. 124 Table 4-b. Summary of average native aspects of EPBC Act BGW zones (zones 1 to 4), including Species Richness (SR), Ground Cover Grass (GCG) and Ground Cover Other (GCO)........................ 125 Table 4-c. Summary of average Native Overstorey (NOS) and Native Midstorey (NMS) aspects of EPBC Act BGW zones (zones 1 to 4). .................................................................................................. 126 Table A1-0-a. Horsepark North plot data summary .......................................................................... 130 Table A1-0-b. Isaacs Ridge plot data summary ................................................................................. 131 Table A1-0-c. Kenny Broadacre plot data summary ......................................................................... 132 Table A1-0-d. Kinlyside plot data summary ...................................................................................... 133 Table A1-0-e. Kenny Woodland plot data summary ......................................................................... 135 Table A2-0-a. Transect data summary ............................................................................................... 142.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 7 1 Introduction Capital Ecology Pty Ltd (Capital Ecology) has been commissioned by the ACT Government Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) to assess and map the quality and extent of the woodland within the following ten ACT offset reserves (‘sites’) (refer Figure 2.1-a): • Horsepark North (95.20 ha) located in the north of the ACT close to the NSW border, north of Horse Park Drive; • Isaacs Ridge (36.93 ha) located in the Jerrabomberra Valley, to the west of Mugga Lane and north of Long Gully Road; • Kenny Broadacre (23.37 ha) located in the Gungahlin Valley, north of Horse Park Drive and bordering the southern section of Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve; • Kinlyside (281.18 ha) located in the north of the ACT, to the west of the suburb of Casey; • Kenny Woodland (102.45 ha) located in the Gungahlin Valley, Kenny Woodland is the woodland component of the offset reserve located north of Morisset Drive, Mitchell; • Taylor (52.93 ha) located in the north of the ACT adjoining the NSW border, northwest of Horse Park Drive; • Throsby East (102.46 ha) located in the Gungahlin Valley, between Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve and the developing suburb of Throsby; • Throsby North (172.38 ha) located in the Gungahlin Valley, between Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve, Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve, and the developing suburb of Throsby; • The Pinnacle (19.53 ha) located in the Molonglo Valley, north of William Hovell Drive and between Kama Nature Reserve and The Pinnacle Nature Reserve; and • Watson Woodland (18.63 ha) located in the suburb of Watson, to the west of Antill Street and north of Roma Mitchell Crescent. The sites are managed by PCS for their biodiversity conservation values. Each site is known to support woodland which meets the definition for the ‘White Box – Yellow Box – Blakely's Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland’ (‘Box-Gum Woodland’ or ‘BGW’) threatened ecological community (TEC) listed under the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) and the ACT Nature Conservation Act 2014 (NC Act), and/or habitat for threatened fauna species (e.g. Golden Sun Moth Synemon plana, Striped Legless Lizard Delma impar, Pink-tailed Worm-lizard Aprasia parapulchella, numerous woodland birds). Box- Gum Woodland is listed as ‘critically endangered’ pursuant to the EPBC Act and ‘endangered’ pursuant to the NC Act. The quality and extent of the woodland in each of the sites has been mapped previously, however the mapping has been undertaken across several seasons, by numerous practitioners, and using various methods and scales. The objective of this study was to develop a logical and repeatable Geographic Information System (GIS) supported assessment methodology and apply this to produce fine-scale baseline mapping of the current on-ground quality and extent of the woodland within each site. The mapping presented herein is consistent across the ten sites and provides an accurate.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 8 and reliable foundation for PCS’s ongoing management and future monitoring of the significant biodiversity values within. Note: The previous mapping was provided to Capital Ecology by PCS, however to avoid influencing the mapping results, it was deliberately not reviewed until the report preparation stage of the study. This report is structured in the following manner. • Section 2 – Methods. Section 2 provides a detailed description of the mapping methodology. • Section 3 – Results. Section 3 provides the results of the mapping study, presented as text, tables and GIS-prepared figures. The results are presented as a sub-section for each site such that each may be considered in a standalone manner. Notwithstanding this, the results are presented in a consistent manner across sites to facilitate comparison between sites. A brief discussion is provided for each site describing any interesting observations from the data, or otherwise observed, together with notes comparing the current mapping to previous mapping. • Section 4 – Summary and Conclusion. Section 4 provides an overview of the study and outline of the key ‘project-scale’ conclusions and recommendations. • References – A list of the studies, guidelines, and other documents reviewed and considered during development of the mapping methodology and its on-ground application. Appendices – Appendix 1 and Appendix 2 provide the study data presented as summary tables. Appendix 3 provides the PCS Excel Spreadsheets (excel files in separate .zip folder) and Appendix 4 provides the GIS Data (shapefiles in separate .zip folder)..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 9 Figure 2.1-a. Locality Plan.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 10 2 Methods 2.1 Four-step temperate vegetation mapping method The four-step method employed for this study was developed by Capital Ecology in 2015 and has been trialled and improved during its subsequent application at numerous sites across the Southern Tablelands of NSW and the ACT. The method was employed to map areas of natural grassland in spring 2016, together with the woodland and derived grassland at Mulangarri and Gungaderra offset reserves (Capital Ecology 20171). The four-step method can be used to assess and map each of the Plant Community Types (PCTs) occurring in the lowland areas of the Southern Tablelands of NSW and the ACT. As detailed below, the four-step method draws upon elements of the relevant contemporary Commonwealth Government (Commonwealth of Australia 20062), ACT Government (ACT Government 2015a3; ACT Government 2015b4), and NSW Government (NSW Government 20145 20176) vegetation mapping guidelines, together with other technical guidelines. Each step of the four-step method has a specific purpose and must achieve a specific outcome which generally becomes the foundation for the subsequent step. Repeatability is a key element of vegetation mapping methodologies when applied to offset sites which are to be periodically monitored. Accordingly, the four-step method is described in full below. 2 .1.2 Purpose = to identify and delineate the boundaries of each PCT within the site. Outcome = GIS mapping of PCT boundaries. The on-ground boundaries of each of the PCTs (as defined in ACT Government 2015c7) present within the site were accurately mapped using either hand-held GPS or by marking boundaries directly onto high resolution orthorectified aerial photograph field maps (displaying the ACT Government’s May 2017 aerial imagery available under CC.4.0) with one metre contours. PCT boundary delineation was undertaken by walking or driving (as deemed most suitable), carefully determining and recording the boundary alignment. The vegetation within each of the sites has undergone various types and degrees of modification over the last 150 years. This modification often removes or disguises the elements which would have once clearly defined the PCT boundaries (noting that ecotones are usually gradual transitions between vegetation communities, often in excess of 50 m in width). As such, the PCT boundary 1 Capital Ecology (2017a). ACT Environmental Offsets – 2016 Grassland Mapping Report. Prepared for ACT Government Parks and Conservation Service. 2 Commonwealth of Australia (2006). Policy Statement 3.5: White Box – Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodlands and derived native grasslands. Commonwealth Department of Environment and Heritage. 3 ACT Government (2015a). Monitoring Guidelines for Box-Gum Woodlands. Conservation Research, October 2015. 4 ACT Government (2015b). ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Assessment Methodology. Environment and Planning. May 2015. 5 NSW Government (2014). BioBanking Assessment Methodology 2014. NSW Government Office of Environment and Heritage. 6 NSW Government (2017). Biodiversity Assessment Method. Office of Environment and Heritage. 7 ACT Government (2015c). ACT Vegetation Types Database – Attachment to the ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Assessment Methodology. 18 May 2015..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 11 delineation involved carefully reading the landscape, considering numerous less conspicuous landscape elements, such as the: • presence, species, growth form and density of remnant canopy trees and/or stags or stumps of these; • presence and species of midstorey shrubs and trees; • floristic composition of the groundstorey; and • the landscape position and other geographical features (elevation, aspect, soils, apparent hydrology etc.). Step 1 is critical to the accurate mapping of temperate vegetation communities and was completed and mapped in GIS prior to moving on to Step 2. Note: The portions of the Kenny site identified as supporting a natural grassland PCT (primarily PCT- ACT01) have been mapped applying this method and are presented in the concurrently prepared report (Capital Ecology 20188). 2 .1.3 Purpose = to identify and delineate the boundaries of each vegetation zone within the site. Outcome = GIS mapping of vegetation zone boundaries. The mapped PCTs were further divided into vegetation zones based on the structure, floristic composition and overall quality (‘intactness’) of the vegetation. As described above for Step 1, each patch of each discernible (generally homogenous) vegetation zone was accurately mapped using either hand-held GPS or by marking boundaries directly onto recent high resolution orthorectified aerial photograph field maps with one metre contours. Vegetation zone boundary delineation was undertaken by walking or driving (as deemed most suitable), carefully determining and recording the boundary alignment. Table 2.1-a and Table 2.1-b outline the vegetation zones which were defined for PCTs ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’ and ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’. 8 Capital Ecology (2018). 2017 Grassland Quality and Extent Mapping – ACT Government Environmental Offsets. Prepared for the ACT Government Parks and Conservation Service..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 12 Table 2.1-a. Vegetation zones for PCT ACT16 PCT Groundstorey Dominance (perennial) Native or Exotic Mature characteristic canopy sp./spp. Present or Absent Regeneration of characteristic canopy sp./spp. Present or Absent Native Forb Diversity Low, Mod-High Low = < 12 sp. (disturbance tolerant spp. only) Mod-High = ≥12 sp.; incl. ≥ 1 important sp.; +/- disturbance sensitive spp. Vegetation Zone ID Colour as per mapping ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland Native Present Present Mod-High 16.1 (EPBC BGW) Low 16.2 (EPBC BGW) Absent Present Mod-High 16.3 (EPBC BGW) Absent Mod-High 16.4 (EPBC BGW) Absent Low 16.5 Exotic Present Present Low 16.6 Present Absent Low 16.7 Absent Absent Low 16.8.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 13 Table 2.1-b. Vegetation zones for PCT ACT25 PCT Groundstorey Dominance (perennial) Native or Exotic Mature characteristic canopy sp./spp. Present or Absent Regeneration of characteristic canopy sp./spp. Present or Absent Native Forb Diversity Low, Mod-High Low = few or none (disturbance tolerant spp. only) Mod-High = ≥12 sp; incl. ≥ 1 important sp.; +/- disturbance sensitive spp. Vegetation Zone ID Colour as per mapping ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Native Present Present Mod-High 25.1 Low 25.2 Absent Present Mod-High 25.3 (none present) Absent Mod-High 25.4 Absent Low 25.5 Exotic Present Present Low 25.6 Present Absent Low 25.7 Absent Absent Low 25.8.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 14 The vegetation zones defined are consistent across all sites. This permits direct comparison between offset sites and the values within and assists in determining the type and prioritisation of management activities. Patches of Kinlyside, Taylor, and Horsepark North were planted with native eucalypts in the 1970s and 1980s. These plantings were undertaken by/for the ACT Government in order to provide future sources of firewood for Canberra. The rip lines and uplifted rocks from the deep ripping carried out to facilitate the planting are evident throughout the patches. Whilst some of the eucalypts planted are characteristic of the relevant PCT, many of the planted trees are the more rapidly growing species characteristic of the higher elevation areas of the ACT and elsewhere (i.e. Ribbon Gum E. viminalis, Blue Gum E. globulus). The plantation patches were delineated and mapped based on the relevant PCT, however they were not included in the vegetation zones as they do not constitute remnant vegetation. Step 2 was completed and mapped in draft form in GIS prior to moving on to Step 3. GIS mapping of vegetation zones allows for accurate calculations of the total area of each vegetation zone within the site. As detailed in Table 2.1-c, an additional mapping layer was developed for the combined zones with exotic groundstorey dominance to differentiate areas by the key reason for the exotic dominance (i.e. Stock Camp, Noxious Weed Species, Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species). This additional mapping layer was developed to assist PCS in managing the sites given that the required management measures differ depending upon the reason for the exotic dominance. Table 2.1-c. Reason for Exotic Dominance With regard to the above, it is important to note that the exotic dominance category mapping does not reflect the extent to which any exotic species (or group of exotic species) occurs within a site. Many of the exotic species (notable Serrated Tussock) occur more broadly within the sites, including within vegetation zones with a native dominant understorey. Reason for Exotic Dominance Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species (cultivation or pasture improvement, such as Phalaris pasture) Stock camp (soil nutrification, annual weed dominance) Noxious weed Species (e.g. dense Serrated Tussock or Chilean Needle Grass).
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 15 2 .1.4 Purpose = to record the floristic composition and structure of each vegetation zone. Outcome = recorded floristic composition and structure data. Step 3 for woodland and dry sclerophyll forest PCTs was developed based on the methodology provided in Chapter 3 of the ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Assessment Methodology (ACT Government 2015b). A series of a vegetation assessment plot-transects were completed to adequately sample each vegetation zone, the required number of which was as stipulated in Table 2 of ACT Government (2015b) (extract provided below). Generally, a woodland or dry sclerophyll forest vegetation zone is only considered to be in ‘low condition’ if it lacks the characteristic canopy, lacks regeneration of the canopy, and has an exotic dominant groundstorey (i.e. it is exotic pasture). Extract from ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Assessment Methodology (ACT Government 2015b). As illustrated in Diagram 1, in order to better align the method with the EPBC Act Policy Statement 3.5 – White Box – Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodlands and derived native grasslands (Commonwealth of Australia 2006), the dimensions of each plot-transect were 100 x 20 m (2,000 m2, 0.2 ha), the centreline of which is the 100 m step-point transect. Plot-transects were completed in locations deemed via observation during Steps 1 and 2 to be representative of the vegetation zone..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 16 Diagram 1. Vegetation survey plot-transect Outer line forms 100 x 20 m plot 100 m step-point-transect (thick solid line) Each plot-transect was allocated a four-part identification code as per the below example. i. Site = Kinlyside → Code Part 1 = Ki ii. PCT = ACT16 → Code Part 2 = 16 iii. Vegetation zone = 3 → Code Part 3 = 3 iv. Plot-transect number = 2 → Code Part 4 = 2 ↓ • Plot-transect identification code = Ki_16.3.2. The of each plot-transect is displayed on the vegetation mapping prepared for each site, and GPS coordinates (GDA94 Zone 55) and all GIS shapefiles (GDA94 Zone 55) of the start and end points (recorded with a handheld GPS unit) are provided in Appendices 1 to 4. The following floristic survey data were collected from the 100 x 20 m plot-transect. 1. At each 1 m point along the 100 m step-point transect the ground layer was allocated to one of the following options: • Cryptogams (Moss/Lichen) • Bare Earth • Rocks • Litter/Dead Vegetation • Annual Exotic Grass • Perennial Exotic Grass • Exotic Broadleaf • Perennial Native Grass • Other native 2. An estimate was made of the percent crown cover of each dominant species in each stratum. 3. Every vascular plant species observed in the 2000 m2 plot was recorded..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 17 4. The presence and abundance of natural regeneration of the dominant overstorey eucalypts of at least 15 cm circumference at 130 cm above the ground was recorded. 5. An estimate was made of the numbers of trees in the 2,000 m2 plot that have a circumference of at least 125 cm at 130 cm above the ground. Table 2.1-d provides the survey dates and number of plot-transects per vegetation zone at each site (total for study = 132 plot-transects). The timing of the 2017 surveys was determined in order to ensure that all plot-transects were completed during optimal seasonal conditions. Accordingly, these dates should be replicated as closely as possible for future monitoring purposes. Table 2.1-d. Survey dates and plot-transect numbers per vegetation zone (PCTs combined) Site Survey Dates Number of Plot-Transects Zone 1 Zone 2 Zone 3 Zone 4 Zone 5 Zone 6 Zone 7 Zone 8 Total Horsepark North 31/10/2017 7 - - 7 - - - 1 15 Isaacs Ridge 03/11/2017 - 4 - - - 1 - - 5 Kenny Broadacre 02/11/2017 - 4 - - 4 - - 2 10 Kinlyside 27-30/11/2017 10 7 - 7 2 2 - 1 29 Kenny Woodland 02/11/2017 - 5 - 1 3 2 - 2 13 Taylor 01/11/2017 6 - - 6 - 1 1 1 15 Throsby East 10/11/2017 7 - - 3 2 - 2 14 Throsby North 08/11/2017 4 4 - 3 2 3 - 2 18 The Pinnacle 25/10/2017 3 3 - 1 1 - - - 8 Watson Woodland 10/11/2017 - 3 - - - 2 - - 5 All threatened/rare flora and fauna species observed during Steps 1 to 3 were recorded with a GPS waypoint (individual waypoint if not within a plot-transect), these records are detailed under the relevant site subsection. A photograph was also taken of each threatened/rare flora species and the record has been lodged with Canberra Nature Map. 2 .1.5 Purpose = to determine the areas of the site which support EPBC Act BGW. Outcome = data supported GIS mapping of the EPBC Act BGW within each site. The data recorded during Step 3 for each of the native vegetation zones was analysed to determine whether the vegetation zone meets the listing criteria for the EPBC Act critically endangered ecological community ‘White Box – Yellow Box – Blakely's Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland’ (EPBC Act BGW). Table 2.1-e presents a flowchart of the key elements of the EPBC Act listing criteria for EPBC Act BGW, drawn from the flowchart provided in Commonwealth of Australia (2006)..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 18 Table 2.1-e. Summary of assessment of vegetation zone characteristics against the listing criteria for EPBC Act Box-Gum Woodland Criterion Assessment Results ACT16- Zone1 ACT16- Zone2 ACT16-Zone3 ACT16- Zone4 ACT16- Zone5 ACT16-Zone6 ACT16- Zone7 ACT16- Zone8 1. Is, or was previously, at least one of the most common overstorey species White Box, Yellow Box or Blakely’s Red Gum? Yes – Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum are/were dominant or co-dominant throughout PCT ACT16. 2. Does the patch have a predominantly native understorey? Yes No 3. Is the patch 0.1 ha (1000 m2) or greater in size with 12 or more native understorey species present (excluding grasses)? There must be at least one important species. Yes No Yes Yes No N/A – refer response to Criterion 2 Or Is the patch 2 ha or greater in size with an average of 20 or more mature trees per hectare, or is there natural regeneration of the dominant overstorey eucalypts? Yes Yes Yes (regeneration only) No No Does the patch meet the criteria for the listed TEC? Yes Yes Yes Yes No No EPBC Act BGW - Form Structural Woodland Structural Woodland Derived Grassland Derived Grassland N/A N/A.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 19 Consideration of ACT Nature Conservation Act 2014 Box-Gum Woodland listing Action Plan 10 and Action Plan 27 definition In addition to the EPBC Act listing, it is relevant to note that Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland is also listed as ‘endangered’ pursuant to the ACT Nature Conservation Act 2014 (NC Act). Remnants of the Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland endangered community consistent with the NC Act listed community were defined in Action Plan 10 (ACT Government 19999) and Action Plan 27 (ACT Government 200410) as any polygon in which: • the proportion of crown cover contributed by either E. melliodora or E. blakelyi or both jointly is ≥ 40%; and • understorey is not exotic pasture; and • remnants are not isolated trees or clumps. Polygons within which most or all of the trees have been cleared (referred to as secondary grassland) also constitute the NC Act listed community, provided: • Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum are estimated to have previously been the dominant or co-dominant species; and • the groundstorey is predominately native; and • a moderate diversity of native groundstorey species is present. Whilst the primary focus of this project was to assess and map the areas of the sites which support EPBC Act BGW, the NC Act definition was considered in the definition of vegetation zones. In this regard, the only scenario which would satisfy the NC Act definition but not the EPBC Act definition would be a substantial patch (i.e. not an isolated tree or clump) with: • the characteristic canopy of Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum; and • a low diversity native dominant groundstorey; and • an absence of regeneration of the canopy species. This scenario previously occurred across much of Kenny Woodland, Throsby East, and the southern portion of Throsby North (R. Speirs pers. obs.; Maguire and Mulvaney 201111), however it was not identified within these sites or any of the others during 2017 survey season. The key reason for this is that these areas now support sufficient regeneration of the canopy species to promote them to ACT16-Zone2 (i.e. they are now EPBC Act BGW). Consistency with an alternative definition applied by ACT Government, Conservation Research 9 ACT Government (1999). Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland: An endangered ecological community. Action Plan No. 10. Environment ACT, Canberra. 10 ACT Government (2004). Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. Action Plan No. 27. Environment ACT, Canberra. 11 Maguire O. and Mulvaney M. (2011). Box-Gum Woodland in the ACT. Technical Report 25. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 20 Maguire and Mulvaney (2011) introduced the following recommended alterations to the criteria provided in Action Plan 10 and Action Plan 27 and applied them for their woodland mapping study: • areas with a greater than 30% shrub cover were excluded; • the ‘greater than 50% cover of native ground layer species’ was changed to ‘50% or more of the perennial ground cover must be native’; and • patches containing at least 20 mature Yellow Box or Blakely’s red Gum trees that have a continuous canopy cover, but may have an exotic understorey, were included. This alteration considerably broadens the definition from that provided in Action Plan 10 (ACT Government 1999) and Action Plan 27 (ACT Government 2004). It includes substantially sized polygons with an exotic understorey but a largely intact canopy. It also provides a greater focus on the composition of the perennial ground cover by excluding consideration of annuals, meaning that areas dominated by annuals could still be considered the NC Act listed community. Maguire and Mulvaney (2011) noted the appropriateness of including these areas due to their observed ability to regenerate naturally in a relatively short time if grazing is removed or significantly reduced. In this regard, Maguire and Mulvaney (2011) note that the condition may improve to the extent that such patches would meet the EPBC Act listing criteria. In addition to the area mapped using the Action Plan 10 and Action Plan 27 definition, the application of the above alternative definition would result in the inclusion of patches of ACT16- Zone6 and ACT16-Zone7 which contain at least 20 mature Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s red Gum trees with a continuous canopy cover. Whilst this alternative definition was not considered for this study, it is noted that it would not have applied to substantial areas of the sites given that the retained remnant trees in ACT16-Zone6 and ACT16-Zone7 are generally quite scattered, thus creating a largely discontinuous canopy..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 21 3 Results A summary of results for each site is provided in the following subsections 3.1 to 3.12, together with a table and representative photograph for each vegetation zone (‘zone’). Significant weeds were identified as those listed as ACT Pest Plants (ACT Government 2015d12) and Weeds of National Significance (WoNS)13 and are highlighted in the following subsections. 3.1 Horsepark North 3 .1.1 Figure 3.1-a shows the extent of the PCTs and zones for Horsepark North and the locations of the plot-transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Horsepark North was found to support two PCTs: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 12.85 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 25.31 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 3.75 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.58 ha of Plantation (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’, with the following zones. • 31.22 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. • 14.90 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. • 5.72 ha of Plantation. In total, 38.16 ha of woodland in Horsepark North meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.1-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 12 native species (HN_16.8.1) to 42 native species (HN_25.1.2). These two plots also set the range for the number of important species, which varied from 2 (HN_16.8.1) to 15 (HN_25.1.2). 12 ACT Government (2015d). Pest Plants and Animals (Pest Plants) Declaration 2015 (no 1). Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel. 16 April 2015. 13 Available from http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/invasive/weeds/weeds/lists/wons.html.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 22 Significant weeds were found throughout the site, including Serrated Tussock Nassella trichotoma (all zones). Other pest plants that were widespread include Briar Rose Rosa rubiginosa. Figure 3.1-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Horsepark North. The majority of the exotic areas were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’. Large portions of Horsepark North are severely infested by Serrated Tussock. At the time of survey, the majority of the mature Serrated Tussock plants had been sprayed and the areas were therefore classified according to their native dominant groundlayer. If the Serrated Tussock is not aggressively controlled over the coming years, it is likely that this weed will threated the native groundlayer dominance over large portions of the site. One rare species, Dwarf Milkwort Polygala japonica, was recorded (Species location removed). Tables 3.1a-3.1e provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding plantations). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 23 Table 3.1-a. Horsepark North ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ACT16 Zone 1 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Threatened flora – Dwarf Milkwort Polygala japonica (Species location removed). Size 12.85 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. bridgesiana and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 5 - 15%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 6. Perennial Groundlayer 77 - 90% native. Understorey 23-33 total native species, 21-27 native non-grass species, 9-13 important species. Exotic Species Richness 5 - 13 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock (dense cover in some areas, mostly sprayed). Paterson’s Curse Echium plantagineum and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 24 Table 3.1-b. Horsepark North ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ACT16 Zone 4 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland – Derived Grassland Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 25.31 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 53 - 87% native. Understorey 20-35 total native species, 17-30 native non-grass species, 5-12 important species. Exotic Species Richness 9 - 20 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock (dense cover in some areas, mostly sprayed). St John’s Wort Hypericum perforatum and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 25 Table 3.1-c. Horsepark North ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ACT16 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris Phalaris aquatica and exotic forbs. Size 3.75 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 7% native. Understorey 12 total native species, 11 native non-grass species, 2 important species. Exotic Species Richness 21 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock (mostly sprayed). Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 26 Table 3.1-d. Horsepark North ACT025 Zone 1 results summary ACT25 Zone 1 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 31.22 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. macrorhyncha and E. nortonii. Overstorey Cover 5 - 22%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 8. Perennial Groundlayer 94 - 100% native. Understorey 21-42 total native species, 13-32 native non-grass species, 6-15 important species. Exotic Species Richness 1 - 12 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock (dense cover in some areas, mostly sprayed). Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 27 Table 3.1-e. Horsepark North ACT025 Zone 4 results summary ACT25 Zone 4 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest – Derived Grassland Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 14.90 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 88 - 94% native. Understorey 18-31 total native species, 17-26 native non-grass species, 6-9 important species. Exotic Species Richness 5 - 7 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock (dense cover in some areas, mostly sprayed)..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 28 3 .1.2 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality Horsepark North contains high quality vegetation which is comprised of moderate to high diversity BGW in both structural woodland form and derived grassland form and moderate to high diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest. The BGW groundlayer is dominated by Kangaroo Grass Themeda triandra and Red-leg Grass Bothriochloa macra and includes a diverse array of native forbs. The main ecological values of the site are the 38.16 ha of EPBC Act BGW, the 46.12 ha of moderate to high diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest, and the site’s connectivity with the surrounding reserves in the north of the ACT. The site has been used for sheep and cattle grazing under rural lease for many years. Whilst stock have been rotated between paddocks to allow the groundlayer to recover, this rotation appears to have been applied with a primarily pastoral productivity focus rather than a conservation focus. As a result, there are signs that the stock are having a negative impact on the quality of the site as evidenced by the low herbage mass and the observed grazing of native forbs during the spring flowering season. This grazing will prevent or substantially hinder the reproduction of these species. The impact of stock is not currently sufficient to reduce the quality of the vegetation below moderate, however sustained grazing pressure is likely to progressively reduce the floristic diversity of the site over the medium to long term. Of greatest threat to the values of the site is the infestation of Serrated Tussock which is now widespread and severe across much of the site. At the time of survey, the majority of the mature Serrated Tussock plants had been sprayed and appeared to be dead. The dead tussocks were not included as perennial vegetation and the subject areas were therefore classified according to their living groundlayer vegetation (resulting in most tussock infested areas still displaying native perennial dominance). However, numerous scattered Serrated Tussock plants had not been sprayed, and in some instances substantial patches of Serrated Tussock had been missed entirely. In addition, the properties which neighbour the site are also heavily infested with Serrated Tussock and show no signs of weed control. Given that the Serrated Tussock is so widespread, has been unmanaged for a long period of time, and can build large seedbanks in the soil that remain viable for many years, the infestation throughout Horsepark North will remain the foremost threat to the significant biodiversity values of the site for the foreseeable future. It is recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priorities of the site are the control of Serrated Tussock and the control of stocking rates and timing. The Serrated Tussock should be managed by targeted spraying before seed-set over several consecutive years. Spraying should not be carried out via boom-spraying, as this will also destroy the native groundlayer (as observed in some areas during the current surveys). Any control measures should occur in conjunction with the neighbouring properties and appropriate fencing should be considered downwind of those properties which are heavily infested (small aperture mesh fencing can reduce the movement of wind-dispersed Serrated Tussock seed). Stock should be removed from the high value areas during the spring flowering season, and stocking rates should be managed to maintain appropriate herbage mass and to encourage the natural regeneration of the overstorey species..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 29 Comparison to previous mapping EcoLogical Australia (201114) mapped over 2,400 ha of vegetation in the north of Canberra, including the area now known as Horsepark North offset reserve. The field surveys were conducted in accordance with ACT Government (201015) and were ‘undertaken within vegetation polygons identified by a combination of ACT Government vegetation mapping, aerial photograph interpretation and mapping by the Conservation Council (2008)’. However, the vegetation mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) was later found to be quite inaccurate (Biosis 201216). Biosis (2012) undertook a program of vegetation community mapping confidence testing in portions of Kinlyside and Taylor. They found that, based on the identified areas of EPBC Act BGW, the accuracy of the mapping presented in Ecological Australia (2011) ranged from 23% to 80%, averaging 61.25% accuracy/ha. Biosis (2012) attributed this inaccuracy to seasonal timing (conducting surveys in autumn instead of late spring/early summer), scale (very broad), and inadequate survey effort. Such inaccuracies make direct comparisons with the current study difficult. EcoLogical Australia (2011) do not provide a site-by-site description of, or total areas for, the vegetation they mapped in 2011. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison is possible between their mapping and that produced by the current study. With respect to Horsepark North, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped the northern half of the site as predominantly BGW. In comparison, the current study places the majority of BGW (ACT16) in the southern half of the site, with the northern areas largely dominated by E. macrorhyncha (ACT25) and associated derived grasslands. Indeed, the mapping between the two studies is almost completely opposite. The data presented in the current study clearly demonstrates that the PCTs and zones have been correctly identified. The misidentification of the vegetation presented by EcoLogical Australia (2011) for Horsepark North does not have any clear explanation. 14 EcoLogical Australia (2011). Gungahlin Vegetation Survey and Mapping Report. Ecological Communities and Threatened Species within the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Area. Prepared for Conservation Planning and Research, ACT Government. 15 ACT Government (2010). Survey guidelines for determining lowland vegetation classification and condition in the ACT. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate – Conservation Planning and Research. 16 Biosis (2012). Vegetation Community Mapping – Confidence Testing within the Gungahlin Strategic Environmental Assessment Area. Survey Report for the Land Development Agency. Project no. 15800..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 30 Figure 3.1-a. Horsepark North Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 31 Figure 3.1-b. Horsepark North EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 32 3.2 Isaacs Ridge 3 .2.2 Figure 3.2-a shows the extent of the woodland PCT and zones for Isaacs Ridge and the locations of the plot-transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Isaacs Ridge was found to support one PCT: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 35.26 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 1.67 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). In total, 35.26 ha of woodland in Isaacs Ridge meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.2-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 6 native species (IR_16.6.1) to 25 native species (IR_16.1.2). These two plots also set the range for the number of important species, which varied from 0 (IR_16.6.1) to 7 (IR_16.1.2). Significant weeds found within the site include Serrated Tussock (Zone 16.1) and Blackberry Rubus fruticosus (Zone 16.1). Other pest plants that were widespread include Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and St John’s Wort. Figure 3.2-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Isaacs Ridge, the exotic areas mostly being restricted to a small drainage area in the south of the site. This exotic area was dominated by Phalaris and classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’. No threatened or rare species were recorded. Tables 3.2a-3.2b provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone. Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 33 Table 3.2-a. Isaacs Ridge ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ACT16 Zone 1 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. There is evidence of selective clearing of Yellow Box and Red Gum in some areas. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 32.26 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi, E. melliodora, E. nortonii and E. polyanthemos. Overstorey Cover 2 - 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 4. Perennial Groundlayer 57 - 80% native. Understorey 12-25 total native species, 9-19 native non-grass species, 0-7 important species. Exotic Species Richness 15 - 16 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock and Blackberry. Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Cootamundra Wattle Acacia baileyana also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 34 Table 3.2-b. Isaacs Ridge ACT16 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer) Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 1.67 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 0.2%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1. Perennial Groundlayer 18% native. Understorey 6 total native species, 5 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 15 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse and St John’s Wort present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 35 3 .2.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation across Isaacs Ridge is comprised almost entirely of BGW in a moderate to high condition, the only exception being an area of exotic pasture in the south of the site. Across the site there is evidence of selective clearing of BGW overstorey species, and that PCT inappropriate species such as E. polyanthemos and E. nortonii have been planted in their place. However, these plantings are not significant enough to alter the classification of zones within the site. The BGW groundlayer is dominated by Red-leg Grass and Weeping Grass Microlaena stipoides and includes a moderate diversity of native forbs. The main ecological values of the site are the 35.26 ha of EPBC Act BGW. Isaacs Ridge adjoins Isaacs Ridge Nature Reserve and represents a logical and valuable addition to the ACT nature reserve network. In general, the site does not have any immediately threatening processes. Some significant weeds are present at low densities, such as Serrated Tussock and Blackberry, and should be controlled by targeted spraying. A few other widespread pest plants within the site should also be controlled, such as Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Briar Rose, but these weeds do not currently occur at a density that pose a high threat to the biodiversity values of the site. It is recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the targeted weed control works and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the BGW conservation values of the site. Comparison to previous mapping Umwelt (201217) mapped the vegetation in Isaacs Ridge offset reserve following the EPBC Act Policy Statement guidelines (Commonwealth of Australia 2006). The criteria for determining EPBC Act BGW were therefore the same as that used in the current study. Umwelt (2012) distinguished between structural woodland and derived grassland patches and surveyed them separately. They concluded that the wooded areas were consistent with the EPBC Act Policy Statement, but that only some areas contained the necessary 12 native understorey species and one important species. The remainder contained a lower-diversity understorey. In addition, they found that the derived grassland areas were not consistent with the EPBC Act listed Box-Gum Woodland CEEC as there were less than 12 native understorey species present in a 0.1 hectare area. However, as they acknowledge in their report, when considered against the assessment guidelines the entire study area is consistent with the definition of a ‘patch’ (defined as five or more trees in which no tree is greater than 75 m from another tree). They therefore concluded that the entire 36.8 ha site conforms to the EPBC Act definition of Box-Gum Woodland. The results from Umwelt (2012) are consistent with those presented in the current study, the main difference being the 1.67 ha of exotic ACT16-Zone6 identified in the current study in the south of the site. 17 Umwelt (2012). Ecological Assessment of Proposed Offset Site for the Mugga Land Resource Management Centre. Prepared for ACT NoWaste. March 2012..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 36 Figure 3.2-a. Isaacs Ridge Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 37 Figure 3.2-b. Isaacs Ridge EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 38 3.3 Kenny Broadacre 3 .3.2 Figure 3.3-a shows the extent of the PCTs and zones for Kenny Broadacre and the locations of the plot-transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Kenny Broadacre was found to support two PCTs: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 3.22 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 6.67 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.19 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 5.05 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’, with the following zones. • 2.57 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. • 6.47 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. In total, 3.22 ha of woodland in Kenny Broadacre meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.3-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 0 native species (KB_16.8.1) to 13 native species (KB_16.5.1). The number of important species varied from 0 (multiple plots) to 2 (KB_16.2.3 and KB_16.5.1). Significant weeds found within the site include Serrated Tussock (Zones 16.2, 16.5 and 16.8). Figure 3.3-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Kenny Broadacre. All of the exotic areas were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’. No threatened or rare species were recorded. Tables 3.3a-3.3e provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding ACT16 Zone 6, due to its small area). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 39 Table 3.3-a. Kenny Broadacre ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, but sparse. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 3.22 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. melliodora, E. macrorhyncha, E. mannifera, and E. dives. Overstorey Cover 10 - 25%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 4 - 8. Perennial Groundlayer 60 - 75% native. Understorey 8-11 total native species, 2-6 native non-grass species, 0-2 important species. Exotic Species Richness 0 - 1 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 40 Table 3.3-b. Kenny Broadacre ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ACT16 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 6.67 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 51 - 95% native. Understorey 6-13 total native species, 1-5 native non-grass species, 0-2 important species. Exotic Species Richness 7 - 8 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 41 Table 3.3-c. Kenny Broadacre ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ACT16 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 5.05 ha (2 plots and 2 transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 0 - 5% native. Understorey 0-2 total native species, 0 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 7 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 42 Table 3.3-d. Kenny Broadacre ACT025 Zone 2 results summary ACT25 Zone 2 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey absent, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 2.57 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. macrorhyncha. Overstorey Cover 10%. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 5. Perennial Groundlayer 48% native. Understorey 5 total native species, 1 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 8 species. Significant Weeds No significant weeds..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 43 Table 3.3-e. Kenny Broadacre ACT025 Zone 5 results summary ACT25 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 6.47 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 50 - 72% native. Understorey 11 total native species, 4-5 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 8 - 9 species. Significant Weeds No significant weeds..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 44 3 .3.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation in Kenny Broadacre is a mix of low diversity BGW and derived grassland, low diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest, and two paddocks of exotic pasture. The wooded areas contain a sparse midstorey and an understorey which lacks shrubs. The BGW groundlayer is dominated by Spear Grasses Austrostipa spp., Wallaby Grass Rytidosperma sp. and Weeping Grass, with a low diversity of native forbs. The site has relatively limited ecological values, these being the 3.22 ha of EPBC Act BGW and a small population of D. impar persisting in the exotic pasture in the south of the site18. However, the main value of the site is its connectivity with the surrounding areas, including Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve, Throsby East offset reserve and Kenny offset reserve. The Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve – Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve complex represent the largest, most intact remaining example the BGW ecological community in Australia. The proposed offset reserves of Throsby East, Throsby North and Kenny Broadacre will add to this continuous patch of BGW and will be included in the extended Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary19. This extension will encircle most of Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve and the three proposed offset reserves with specialised fencing, thereby providing protection from numerous threats and allowing reintroduction programs to be expanded. Kenny Broadacre has been used for sheep and cattle grazing for many years and, given the uniform and dense cover of Phalaris in the exotic areas, these paddocks appear to have been sown in the past for pasture improvement. The history of stock on the site, combined with other land management practices such as widescale clearing, has impacted upon the vegetation throughout the site and contributed to the current sparse midstorey and lack of shrubstorey. Some sparsely distributed significant weeds, such as Serrated Tussock, are present and require control. Conservation-targeted management should be directed towards the improvement of the midstorey and understorey of the wooded areas and conservation of habitat values for the Striped Legless Lizard in those areas where the species is known to occur. It is therefore recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priority of the site is the control of stocking rates. These rates should be determined to best encourage the natural regeneration of the overstorey in the wooded areas of the site, and to ensure appropriate levels of grass herbage mass and tussock structure for the Striped Legless Lizard in those areas where the species is known to occur. With respect to the natural regeneration of the overstorey, techniques such as ‘ripping’ the ground should be considered to encourage regeneration, where appropriate. Comparison to previous mapping As described in Section 3.1.2, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped over 2,400 ha of vegetation in the north of Canberra, including the area now known as Kenny Broadacre offset reserve. However, the 18 Biosis Research (2012). Kenny and Throsby – Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) Survey Report. Author: R. Speirs. Unpublished report to the ACT Government. 19 Capital Ecology (2017b). Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary – Goorooyarroo Extension of Predator-proof Fence – Ecological Impact Assessment and Environmental Significance Opinion Supporting Document. Capital Ecology project no. 2709..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 45 vegetation mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) was later found to be only 23% to 80% accurate, averaging 61.25% accuracy/ha (Biosis 2012). Such inaccuracies make direct comparisons with the current study difficult. EcoLogical Australia (2011) do not provide a site-by-site description of, or total areas for, the vegetation they mapped in 2011. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison is possible between their mapping and that produced by the current study. With respect to Kenny Broadacre, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped a small patch of EPBC Act BGW in the centre of the site. This broadly agrees with the current study. However, they mapped the vast majority of the site as having a Box-Gum Woodland climax community, with only one small patch of Red Stringybark – Scribbly Gum Tableland Forest. In comparison, the current study mapped over one third of the site as dominated by E. macrorhyncha (ACT25), which the data clearly supports..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 46 Figure 3.3-a. Kenny Broadacre Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 47 Figure 3.3-b. Kenny Broadacre EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 48 3.4 Kinlyside 3 .4.2 Figure 3.4-a shows the extent of the PCTs and zones for Kinlyside and the locations of the plot- transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Kinlyside was found to support two PCTs: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 90.73 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 30.04 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 20.33 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 12.30 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 1.79 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.85 ha of Plantation (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’, with the following zones. • 76.38 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. • 8.06 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. • 23.05 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. • 2.16 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity • 0.15 ha of Zone 7: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity • 2.42 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. • 11.79 ha of Plantation. In total 141.10 ha of woodland in Kinlyside meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.4-bFigure 3.1-b)..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 49 Native understorey species richness ranged from 5 native species (Ki_25.8.1) to 44 native species (Ki_16.1.1 and Ki_25.1.5). The range of important species was from 0 (Ki_16.2.1 and Ki_16.6.1) to 20 (Ki_25.1.5). Significant weeds were found throughout the site, including Serrated Tussock (Zones 16.1, 16.2, 16.4, 25.1, 25.4 and 25.6). In comparison to nearby sites, Serrated Tussock is being well controlled. Other pest plants that were widespread include Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and St John’s Wort. Figure 3.4-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Kinlyside. The majority of the exotic areas in Kinlyside were classified as ‘Stock Camps’, with some ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’ in the lower-lying drainage lines. Two rare species were recorded in Kinlyside, Hoary Sunray Leucochrysum albicans var. albicans and Twining Fringe Lily Thysanotus patersonii20. Neither were in monitoring plots. Tables 3.4a-3.4j provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding ACT25 Zone 7, due to its small area). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively. 20 https://canberra.naturemapr.org/Community/Sighting/3383472.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 50 Table 3.4-a. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ACT16 Zone 1 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 90.73 ha (5 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 5 - 20%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0 - 6. Perennial Groundlayer 60 - 91% native. Understorey 34-44 total native species, 27-40 native non-grass species, 10-15 important species. Exotic Species Richness 5 - 22 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort, Briar Rose and Hawthorn Crataegus monogyna also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 51 Table 3.4-b. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 30.04 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 10 - 15%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 5. Perennial Groundlayer 53 - 81% native. Understorey 11-21 total native species, 7-15 native non-grass species, 0-9 important species. Exotic Species Richness 1 - 5 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Scotch Thistle Onopordum acanthium also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 52 Table 3.4-c. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 4 results summary ACT16 Zone 4 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland – Derived Grassland. Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 20.33 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 61 - 88% native. Understorey 24-33 total native species, 17-29 native non-grass species, 4-13 important species. Exotic Species Richness 14 - 26 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Briar Rose and Paterson’s Curse also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 53 Table 3.4-d. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 5 results summary ACT16 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 12.30 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 53 - 58% native. Understorey 11-14 total native species, 6-8 native non-grass species, 1-3 important species. Exotic Species Richness 11 - 16 species. Significant Weeds Briar Rose and Paterson’s Curse present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 54 Table 3.4-e. Kinlyside ACT16 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer). Stock camp. Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by exotic annual and perennial grasses and exotic forbs. Size 1.79 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. macrorhyncha. Overstorey Cover 10%. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 9. Perennial Groundlayer 47% native. Understorey 7 total native species, 6 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 14 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort, Scotch Thistle and Briar Rose present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 55 Table 3.4-f. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 1 results summary ACT25 Zone 1 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 76.38 ha (5 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. macrorhyncha, E. mannifera and E. nortonii. Overstorey Cover 10 - 20%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 6. Perennial Groundlayer 87 - 100% native. Understorey 23-44 total native species, 20-36 native non-grass species, 10-20 important species. Exotic Species Richness 3 - 10 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 56 Table 3.4-g. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 2 results summary ACT25 Zone 2 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 8.06 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. macrorhyncha and E. nortonii. Overstorey Cover 5 - 15%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 8. Perennial Groundlayer 54 - 62% native. Understorey 14-16 total native species, 9-10 native non-grass species, 2-4 important species. Exotic Species Richness 8 - 17 species. Significant Weeds Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and Saffron Thistle Carthamus lanatus present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 57 Table 3.4-h. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 4 results summary ACT25 Zone 4 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest – Derived Grassland Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 23.05 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 58 - 86% native. Understorey 15-28 total native species, 10-24 native non-grass species, 3-11 important species. Exotic Species Richness 11 - 15 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Briar Rose, St John’s Wort and Saffron Thistle also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 58 Table 3.4-i. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 6 results summary ACT25 Zone 6 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest (exotic groundlayer) Stock camp. Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present but sparse, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by exotic annual and perennial grasses and exotic forbs. Size 2.16 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. macrorhyncha and E. nortonii. Overstorey Cover 20%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 5. Perennial Groundlayer 32% native. Understorey 9 total native species, 7 native non-grass species, 1 important species. Exotic Species Richness 13 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse, Saffron Thistle and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 59 Table 3.4-j. Kinlyside ACT25 Zone 8 results summary ACT25 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Stock camp. Overstorey, midstorey and shrubstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by exotic annual and perennial grasses and exotic forbs. Size 2.42 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 24% native. Understorey 5 total native species, 2 native non-grass species, 1 important species. Exotic Species Richness 19 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse, Saffron Thistle and Briar Rose present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 60 3 .4.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality Kinlyside contains a large area of high-quality vegetation, which is largely comprised of moderate to high diversity BGW and derived grassland and moderate to high diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest and derived grassland. The southern areas of the site do contain lower diversity areas, which likely reflects a history of higher stocking rates due to their proximity to nearby sheering sheds. In addition, there are a number of scattered stock camps within the site. The moderate to high diversity areas contain a healthy midstorey and understorey, and the BGW groundlayer is generally dominated by Kangaroo Grass and Red-leg Grass with a diverse array of native forbs. The main ecological values of the site are the 141.10 ha of EPBC Act BGW, the 99.43 ha of moderate to high diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest, the only known population of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard in the Gungahlin region (R. Speirs pers. obs.) and the site’s connectivity with the surrounding reserves in the north of the ACT. Kinlyside is a logical and highly valuable addition to the ACT nature reserve network. The site has been used for sheep and cattle grazing under rural lease for many years. Based on the high density of overstorey regeneration, the healthy shrubstorey and the diverse array of native forbs across the site, the current lessees appear to be doing a good job in terms of stocking rates and grazing rotation. However, it is likely that lighter stocking rates, particularly during the spring flowering season, would have a beneficial effect across the site. Stocking rates should also be reduced in the lower diversity areas to improve floristic diversity and promote and the health and regeneration of the understorey. While weeds such as Serrated Tussock and Briar Rose are present in many of the recorded vegetation zones, their severity is far lower than the surrounding areas and it appears that they are being adequately managed by the lessees. This management should continue. It is recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priorities of the site are the control of stocking rates and timing. Stocking rates should be lowered in general across the site, and particularly in the higher diversity areas, to ensure appropriate levels of herbage mass and floristic diversity. This is particularly important during the spring flowering season. Comparison to previous mapping As described in Section 3.1.2, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped over 2,400 ha of vegetation in the north of Canberra, including the area now known as Kinlyside offset reserve. However, the vegetation mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) was later found to be only 23% to 80% accurate, averaging 61.25% accuracy/ha (Biosis 2012). Such inaccuracies make direct comparisons with the current study difficult. EcoLogical Australia (2011) do not provide a site-by-site description of, or total areas for, the vegetation they mapped in 2011. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison is possible between their mapping and that produced by the current study. With respect to Kinlyside, the mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) broadly agrees with that of the current study (refer Biosis 2012). The most striking difference between the two studies is a large section of woodland and derived grassland in the western portion of the site, which EcoLogical Australia (2011) identified as BGW and.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 61 the current study identified as dominated by E. macrorhyncha and E. nortonii (ACT25). The data collected in the current study clearly demonstrates that the current PCT is ACT25..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 62 Figure 3.4-a. Kinlyside Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 63 Figure 3.4-b. Kinlyside EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 64 3.5 Kenny Woodland 3 .5.2 Figure 3.5-a shows the extent of the woodland PCT and zones for Kenny Woodland and the locations of the plot-transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Kenny Woodland was found to support one PCT: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 53.49 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.43 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 34.48 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 8.60 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 5.44 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). In total, 53.92 ha of woodland in Kenny Woodland meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.5-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 2 native species (KW_16.2.1) to 20 native species (KW_16.4.1). The number of important species varied from 0 (multiple plots) to 5 (KB_16.4.1). Significant weeds found within the site include Serrated Tussock (all zones except 16.4) and African Boxthorn Lycium ferocissimum (Zone 16.5). In some areas the infestation of Serrated Tussock is significant. Other pest plants that were widespread include Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and Scotch Thistle. Figure 3.5-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Kenny Woodland. All of the exotic areas were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’, except for one small ‘Stock Camp’. Whilst the Serrated Tussock density was high in some areas, it did not reach the level necessary for classification as ‘Noxious Weeds’. No threatened or rare species were recorded. Tables 3.5a-3.5e provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone. Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 65 Table 3.5-a. Kenny Woodland ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, but relatively sparse. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 53.49 ha (5 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 4 - 15%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 3. Perennial Groundlayer 55 - 75% native. Understorey 2-4 total native species, 1-3 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 8 - 14 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse, Scotch Thistle and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 66 Table 3.5-b. Kenny Woodland ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ACT16 Zone 4 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland – Derived Grassland Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 0.43 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 74% native. Understorey 20 total native species, 14 native non-grass species, 5 important species. Exotic Species Richness 10 species. Significant Weeds Briar Rose and Paterson’s Curse present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 67 Table 3.5-c. Kenny Woodland ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ACT16 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 34.48 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 59 - 67% native. Understorey 3-5 total native species, 2-4 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 10 - 13 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock and African Boxthorn. Paterson’s Curse, Scotch Thistle and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 68 Table 3.5-d. Kenny Woodland ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer) Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 8.60 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi. Overstorey Cover 10 - 20%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 4 - 6. Perennial Groundlayer 2 - 13% native. Understorey 4-4 total native species, 3-4 native non-grass species, 0-1 important species. Exotic Species Richness 5 - 10 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse and Hawthorn also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 69 Table 3.5-e. Kenny Broadacre ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ACT16 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris, Paspalum, Serrated Tussock and exotic forbs. Size 5.44 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 9% native. Understorey 3-4 total native species, 2-3 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 9 - 14 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock (severe infestation in plot KW_16.8.2, pictured below). Paterson’s Curse and Scotch Thistle also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 70 3 .5.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation in Kenny Woodland is a mix of low diversity native or exotic BGW and derived grassland, with one small patch of moderate to high quality BGW derived grassland in the south of the site. The structural woodland areas contain a sparse midstorey and an understorey which lacks shrubs. The groundlayer in the native BGW areas is dominated by Tall Spear Grass Austrostipa bigeniculata and contains a low diversity of native forbs. The main ecological values of the site are the 53.92 ha of EPBC Act BGW, the large number of hollow bearing canopy trees that provide nesting and foraging habitat for woodland birds, and the site’s connectivity with the grassland component of Kenny which contains one of the largest and most densely occupied remaining patches of Striped Legless Lizard habitat (Biosis Research 2012). The western portions of Kenny Woodland, together with much of the adjoining Kenny Grassland, has undergone a history of prolonged and intensive pasture improvement via the sowing of Phalaris and addition of superphosphate (R. Speirs 2010 discussion with former lessee, John McKinnon). This pasture improvement, together with a history of low-intensity cattle grazing under a set-stocking arrangement, has undoubtedly encouraged the dominance of native and exotic tussock-forming grasses, reduced the density of the midstorey, removed the shrubstorey, and led to the loss of all but the most disturbance tolerant native forbs from the site. The areas of native dominance (PCT16- Zone2 and Zone5) are generally associated with the higher elevated ridges, and the drainage lines support Phalaris dominated exotic pasture (PCT16-Zone6 and Zone8). Serrated Tussock occurred in only scattered patches and at only low density in Kenny in 2010-11 (R. Speirs pers. obs.), however it has since spread throughout much of the site. The Serrated Tussock was not found to thus far occur at a density that warranted classification of areas as ‘Noxious Weed Species’ dominance (refer Table 2.1-c), although it was recorded as a substantial component of some step-point transects. The Serrated Tussock infestation throughout Kenny is now a significant threat to the biodiversity values of the site. Conservation-targeted management should be directed towards the improvement of the midstorey and understorey of the structural woodland areas and conservation of habitat values for the Striped Legless Lizard. It is therefore recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priority of the site is the control of stocking rates and the control of Serrated Tussock. The stocking should be determined to best encourage the natural regeneration of the overstorey in the wooded areas of the site, and to ensure appropriate levels of grass herbage mass and tussock structure for the Striped Legless Lizard in those areas where they are known to occur. With respect to the natural regeneration of the overstorey, techniques such as ‘ripping’ the ground should be considered to encourage regeneration, where appropriate..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 71 Comparison to previous mapping The structure and floristic composition of the vegetation within Kenny was broadly assessed and mapped by Biosis Research (201121) and David Hogg Pty Ltd (201122). The primary purpose of Biosis Research (2011) was to determine the portions of the study area which possess the grassland attributes of potential habitat for the Striped Legless Lizard. Section 4.1.1.2 of the Biosis report provides a detailed description of the vegetation type and quality within the site as observed during spring 2010, this being categorised as either ‘Native Pasture’ or ‘Exotic Pasture – Tussock Formation Present’. Consistent with the purpose of the Biosis study, the vegetation assessment was based on observations only (i.e. no data collection) and the mapping was prepared at a very broad scale. Notwithstanding this, Biosis’ categorisation of the vegetation quality within the site is quite similar to that of this study (i.e. ‘Native Pasture’ ~ ACT16-Zone2 and Zone5; ‘Exotic Pasture – Tussock Formation Present’ ~ ACT16-Zone6 and Zone8). David Hogg Pty Ltd (2011) surveyed for Golden Sun Moth and threatened or uncommon woodland birds and plants. The authors also surveyed the vegetation within areas previously identified as BGW using 20 x 20 m quadrats based on methodologies outlined in Rehwinkel (200723) and Sharp and Gould (201024). They did not map the PCTs and zones in Kenny, but their floristic surveys agree with the current study, finding that: ‘The floristic surveys confirm that, with the exception of the Area G (Quadrat 3), the woodland area at Kenny has very low diversity of native species and is highly homogeneous. As identified in the previous report the main woodland area and nearby secondary grasslands are dominated by tall spear grass and characterised by very poor diversity of native forbs (Figure 4.2). Given the survey effort invested in these surveys, the presence of only 27 (19 excluding Quadrat 3) native forb species, all disturbance tolerant, indicates that the site has very low diversity. The native groundcover appears to have regenerated after having been disturbed by pasture improvement and intensive grazing (Ref. 1). This has resulted in a predominantly native groundcover across the site with limited forb diversity. This survey does not provide additional information relating to the extent of the box – gum woodland ecological community, as at Kenny this is determined primarily by the extent of native-dominated understorey rather than by the diversity of native plant species…’ 21 Biosis Research (2011). Kenny – Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) Survey Report. Author: R. Speirs Unpublished report to the ACT Government. 22 David Hogg Pty Ltd (2011). Kenny Ecological Surveys. Report prepared for ACT Planning and Land Authority. February 2011. 23 Rehwinkel (2007). A Method to Assess Grassy Ecosystem Sites: Using floristic information to assess a site’s quality. NSW Department of Environment and Climate Change. 24 Sharp and Gould (2010). ACT Vegetation Monitoring Manual, A step by step guide to monitoring native vegetation in the ACT. Environment ACT, Canberra..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 72 Figure 3.5-a. Kenny Woodland Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 73 Figure 3.5-b. Kenny Woodland EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 74 3.6 Taylor 3 .6.2 Figure 3.6-a shows the extent of the PCTs and zones for Taylor and the locations of the plot- transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Taylor was found to support two PCTs: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 5.35 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 4.85 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.53 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.28 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’, with the following zones. • 17.83 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. • 10.76 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. • 0.77 ha of Zone 7: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity • 1.10 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. • 11.34 ha of Plantation. In total 10.20 ha of woodland in Taylor meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.6-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 5 native species (Ta_25.7.1 and Ta_25.8.1) to 42 native species (Ta_25.4.1). The range of important species was from 0 (Ta_25.7.1 and Ta_25.8.1) to 17 (Ta_25.1.3). Significant weeds were found throughout the site, including Serrated Tussock (all zones). Other pest plants that were widespread include St John’s Wort and Briar Rose. Figure 3.8-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Taylor. All of the exotic areas in Taylor were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’. One rare species, Dwarf Milkwort, was recorded (Species location removed)..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 75 Tables 3.6a-3.6g provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding plantations and ACT16 Zone 8, due to its small area). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively. Table 3.6-a. Taylor ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ACT16 Zone 1 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. There is evidence of selective clearing of Yellow Box and Red Gum in some areas. Midstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 5.35 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi. Overstorey Cover 0 - 2%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0 - 1. Perennial Groundlayer 57 - 84% native. Understorey 19-30 total native species, 16-26 native non-grass species, 12-12 important species. Exotic Species Richness 16 - 19 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 76 Table 3.6-b. Taylor ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ACT16 Zone 4 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland – Derived Grassland. Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Threatened flora – Dwarf Milkwort Polygala japonica (Species location removed). Size 4.85 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 61 - 66% native. Understorey 15-23 total native species, 12-17 native non-grass species, 4-8 important species. Exotic Species Richness 17 - 19 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort, Saffron Thistle and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 77 Table 3.6-c. Taylor ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer). Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by exotic annual and perennial grasses and exotic forbs. Size 0.53 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 12. Perennial Groundlayer 8% native. Understorey 16 total native species, 10 native non-grass species, 4 important species. Exotic Species Richness 18 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 78 Table 3.6-d. Taylor ACT025 Zone 1 results summary ACT25 Zone 1 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 17.83 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. bridgesiana, E. macrorhyncha and E. rossii. Overstorey Cover 5 - 30%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 15. Perennial Groundlayer 62 - 96% native Understorey 20-40 total native species, 16-35 native non-grass species, 2-17 important species. Exotic Species Richness 5 - 14 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 79 Table 3.6-e. Taylor ACT025 Zone 4 results summary ACT25 Zone 4 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest – Derived Grassland Overstorey absent. Acacia dominated midstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 10.76 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 63 - 73% native. Understorey 27-42 total native species, 17-34 native non-grass species, 4-14 important species. Exotic Species Richness 15 - 17 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort, Saffron Thistle, Paterson’s Curse and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 80 Table 3.6-f. Taylor ACT25 Zone 7 results summary ACT25 Zone 7 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest (exotic groundlayer) Overstorey present but sparse, midstorey and shrubstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by exotic annual and perennial grasses and exotic forbs. A small section of this area is a likely stock camp. However, the majority is dominated by exotic pastural grasses and exotic forbs. Size 0.77 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. bridgesiana. Overstorey Cover 5. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 3. Perennial Groundlayer 27% native. Understorey 5 total native species, 3 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 17 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort, Paterson’s Curse and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 81 Table 3.6-g. Taylor ACT25 Zone 8 results summary ACT25 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Overstorey, midstorey and shrubstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by exotic annual and perennial grasses and exotic forbs. A small section of this area is a likely stock camp. However, the majority is dominated by exotic pastural grasses and exotic forbs. Size 1.10 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 9% native. Understorey 5 total native species, 3 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 15 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. St John’s Wort, Paterson’s Curse and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 82 3 .6.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality Taylor contains high-quality vegetation which is comprised of moderate to high diversity BGW and derived grassland, and moderate to high diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest and derived grassland. A small area dominated by pastural and agricultural weeds occurs in the south-west corner of the site, and there is a large 11.34 ha patch of eucalypt plantation in the centre of the site. The BGW groundlayer is dominated by Kangaroo Grass, Red-leg Grass and Wallaby Grasses, and includes a diverse array of native forbs. The significant ecological values of the site are the 10.20 ha of EPBC Act BGW, habitat for woodland birds, and the site’s connectivity with the surrounding reserves in the north of the ACT. Taylor is a logical and valuable addition to the ACT nature reserve network. The site has been used to graze stock for many years. As a result, there are signs that the stock are having a negative impact on the quality of the site as evidenced by the low herbage mass and the observed grazing of native forbs during the spring flowering season. This grazing will prevent or substantially hider the reproduction of these species. The impact of stock is not currently sufficient to reduce the quality of the vegetation below moderate, however sustained grazing pressure is likely to progressively reduce the floristic diversity of the site over the medium to long term. Of greatest threat to the values of the site are the weeds, which include Serrated Tussock and African Lovegrass (not recorded in any plot, but present in the west of the site). These weeds are more prevalent on the higher aspects in the west of the site, where the prevailing winds from west to east have the potential to spread seed over a wide area and thereby threaten the condition of the woodlands and derived grasslands of Taylor and beyond. Other widespread weeds, such as Briar Rose and St John’s Wort, also require control. It is recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priorities of the site are the control of stocking rates and the control of weeds. Stocking rates should be lowered in general across the site to ensure appropriate levels of grass herbage mass and floristic diversity. This is particularly important during the spring flowering season. Comparison to previous mapping As described in Section 3.1.2, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped over 2,400 ha of vegetation in the north of Canberra, including the area encompassed by Taylor offset reserve. However, the vegetation mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) was later found to be only 23% to 80% accurate, averaging 61.25% accuracy/ha (Biosis 2012). Such inaccuracies make direct comparisons with the current study difficult. EcoLogical Australia (2011) do not provide a site-by-site description of, or total areas for, the vegetation they mapped in 2011. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison is possible between their mapping and that produced by the current study. With respect to Taylor, the mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) broadly agrees with that of the current study in terms of the identified PCTs. However, EcoLogical Australia (2011) classified the entire western half of the site as eucalypt.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 83 plantations. The current study mapped those areas as remnant woodland dominated by E. bridgesiana and E. rossii, a classification which the data clearly supports..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 84 Figure 3.6-a. Taylor Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 85 Figure 3.6-b. Taylor EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 86 3.7 Throsby East 3 .7.2 Figure 3.7-a shows the extent of the PCTs and zones for Throsby East and the locations of the plot- transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Throsby East was found to support two PCTs: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 38.36 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 27.71 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 10.39 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 1.09 ha of Zone 7: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 13.69 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’, with the following zones. • 10.97 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. • 0.25 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity. In total, 38.36 ha of woodland in Throsby East meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.7-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 4 native species (TE_16.6.1) to 23 native species (TE_25.2.2). The number of important species varied from 0 (multiple plots) to 4 (TE_25.2.2). Significant weeds found within the site include Serrated Tussock (Zones 16.2, 16.6 and 16.8). Other pest plants that were widespread include Paterson’s Curse. Figure 3.7-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Throsby East. The majority of the exotic areas were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’, with a number of ‘Stock Camps’ located under paddock trees. No threatened or rare species were recorded. Tables 3.7a-3.7e provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding ACT16 Zone 7 and ACT25 Zone 5, due to its small areas). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 87 Table 3.7-a. Throsby East ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present but sparse, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 38.36 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 2. Perennial Groundlayer 52 - 58% native. Understorey 7-15 total native species, 1-9 native non-grass species, 0-3 important species. Exotic Species Richness 0 - 1 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 88 Table 3.7-b. Throsby East ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ACT16 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 27.71 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 52 - 58% native. Understorey 8-12 total native species, 3-6 native non-grass species, 0-1 important species. Exotic Species Richness 11 - 16 species. Significant Weeds Saffron Thistle, Paterson’s Curse and Briar Rose present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 89 Table 3.7-c. Throsby East ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer) Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 10.39 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 5%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 1. Perennial Groundlayer 0 - 19% native. Understorey 4-12 total native species, 0-5 native non-grass species, 0-1 important species. Exotic Species Richness 6 - 13 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Scotch Thistle also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 90 Table 3.7-d. Throsby East ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ACT16 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 13.69 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 20 - 21% native. Understorey 5-8 total native species, 0-4 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 9 - 12 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 91 Table 3.7-e. Throsby East ACT025 Zone 2 results summary ACT25 Zone 2 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 10.97 ha (3 plots-transects). Overstorey Species E. rossii. Overstorey Cover 10 - 25%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 5. Perennial Groundlayer 54 - 84% native. Understorey 8-23 total native species, 4-12 native non-grass species, 0-4 important species. Exotic Species Richness 0 - 1 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 92 3 .7.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation in Throsby East is a mix of low diversity native or exotic BGW and derived grassland, with only one patch of low diversity Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest in the north of the site. The structural woodland areas contain a sparse midstorey and an understorey which lacks shrubs. The BGW groundlayer is dominated by Spear Grasses, Weeping Grass and Red-leg Grass, and contains a low diversity of native forbs. The exotic areas are largely dominated by Phalaris and occur in the drainage lines and lower-lying areas of the site. There are numerous stock camps scattered throughout the site, generally extending only a short distance from a large remnant eucalypt. The significant ecological values of the site are the 38.36 ha of EPBC Act BGW, the large number of hollow bearing canopy trees that provide habitat for birds (including the threatened Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii), and the site’s connectivity with the surrounding areas, including Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve, Throsby North offset reserve and Kenny Broadacre offset reserve. As mentioned in Section 3.3.3, Throsby East will be included in the extended Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and add to Australia’s largest remaining patch of reserved relatively intact BGW. The history of stock on the site, combined with other land management practices such as broad scale clearing, has impacted upon the vegetation throughout the site and contributed to the current sparse midstorey and lack of shrubstorey. Some sparsely distributed significant weeds, such as Serrated Tussock, are present and require control. Conservation-targeted management should be directed towards the improvement of the midstorey and understorey of the structural woodland areas and conservation of habitat values for woodland birds, particularly the Superb Parrot. It is therefore recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priority of the site is the control of stocking rates. These rates should be determined to best encourage the natural regeneration of the overstorey in the structural woodland areas of the site, and to ensure appropriate levels of grass herbage mass in the Phalaris dominated areas. With respect to the natural regeneration of the overstorey, techniques such as ‘ripping’ the ground should be considered to encourage regeneration, where appropriate. Comparison to previous mapping As described in Section 3.1.2, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped over 2,400 ha of vegetation in the north of Canberra, including the area now known as Throsby East offset reserve. However, the vegetation mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) was later found to be only 23% to 80% accurate, averaging 61.25% accuracy/ha (Biosis 2012). Such inaccuracies make direct comparisons with the current study difficult. EcoLogical Australia (2011) do not provide a site-by-site description of, or total areas for, the vegetation they mapped in 2011. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison is possible between their mapping and that produced by the current study. With respect to Throsby East, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped the majority of the site as BGW, classifying almost all of that (both the structural woodland areas and the derived grassland) as meeting the criteria for EBPC Act BGW. For the derived grasslands to meet the criteria for EPBC Act BGW, EcoLogical Australia (2011) must have.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 93 assessed the diversity of those areas to be moderate or higher. In contrast, the current study identified all native areas as low diversity, a classification which the data clearly support. As a result only those areas containing structural woodland over a native groundlayer were classified as EPBC Act BGW. In addition, EcoLogical Australia (2011) incorrectly classified the northern part of the site as dominated by Red Stringybark – Scribbly Gum Tableland Forrest, where as it is in fact low diversity BGW (ACT16-Zone2)..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 94 Figure 3.7-a. Throsby East Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 95 Figure 3.7-b. Throsby East EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 96 3.8 Throsby North 3 .8.2 Figure 3.8-a shows the extent of the woodland PCT and zones for Throsby North and the locations of the plot-transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Throsby North was found to support one PCT: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 45.67 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 40.83 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 11.73 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 13.72 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 54.51 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 5.41 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). In total 98.23 ha of woodland in Throsby North meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.8-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 5 native species (TN_16.8.1) to 39 native species (TN_16.1.1). The range of important species was from 0 (multiple plots) to 13 (TN_16.1.1 and TN_16.1.4). Significant weeds were found throughout the site, including Serrated Tussock (Zones 16.1, 16.2 and 16.4). Other pest plants that were widespread include Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and St John’s Wort. Figure 3.8-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Throsby North. All of the exotic areas in Throsby North were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’. No threatened or rare species were recorded. Tables 3.8a-3.8f provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone. Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 97 Table 3.8-a. Throsby North ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ACT16 Zone 1 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 45.67 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 10 - 20%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0 - 4. Perennial Groundlayer 70 - 88% native. Understorey 17-39 total native species, 10-31 native non-grass species, 4-13 important species. Exotic Species Richness 7 - 13 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 98 Table 3.8-b. Throsby North ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 40.83 ha (4 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 2 - 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 4. Perennial Groundlayer 52 - 63% native. Understorey 13-17 total native species, 5-8 native non-grass species, 1-3 important species. Exotic Species Richness 9 - 16 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and St John’s Wort also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 99 Table 3.8-c. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ACT16 Zone 4 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland – Derived Grassland. Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 11.73 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 69 - 77% native. Understorey 25-34 total native species, 16-25 native non-grass species, 9-12 important species. Exotic Species Richness 9 - 17 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Briar Rose, Paterson’s Curse and St John’s Wort also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 100 Table 3.8-d. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ACT16 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 13.72 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 51 - 60% native. Understorey 14-15 total native species, 6-8 native non-grass species, 0-2 important species. Exotic Species Richness 8 - 13 species. Significant Weeds No significant weeds recorded..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 101 Table 3.8-e. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer). Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 54.51 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 10 - 30%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 7. Perennial Groundlayer 7 - 38% native. Understorey 6-8 total native species, 2-3 native non-grass species, 0-2 important species. Exotic Species Richness 9 - 11 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 102 Table 3.8-f. Throsby North ACT016 Zone 8 results summary ACT16 Zone 8 Description Exotic Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris and exotic forbs. Size 5.41 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 5 - 16% native. Understorey 5-7 total native species, 2-2 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 6 - 10 species. Significant Weeds Scotch Thistle present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 103 3 .8.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation of Throsby North is comprised of moderate to high diversity BGW and derived grassland in the north, low diversity BGW and derived grassland in the south-east, and low diversity BGW with an exotic groundlayer in the south-west. The moderate to high diversity areas contain a healthy midstorey and understorey and a groundlayer dominated by Kangaroo Grass, Wallaby Grass, Spear Grasses and Red-leg Grass, which includes a diverse array of native forbs. The low diversity areas contain a sparse midstorey, an understorey which lacks shrubs and a groundlayer dominated by Spear Grasses, Wallaby Grass and Kangaroo Grass, with a low diversity of native forbs. The low diversity areas with an exotic groundlayer also contain a sparse midstorey, an understorey lacking shrubs, and a groundlayer which is dominated by Phalaris. The significant ecological values of the site are the 98.23 ha of EPBC Act BGW, significant habitat for woodland birds, and the site’s connectivity with the surrounding areas, including providing a vital link between Mulligan’s Flat Nature Reserve and Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve. As mentioned in Section 3.3.3, Throsby North will be included in the extended Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and add to Australia’s largest remaining patch of reserved relatively intact BGW. The history of stock on parts of Throsby North, combined with other land management practices such as clearing, has impacted upon the vegetation in parts of the site and contributed to the current sparse midstorey, lack of shrubstorey and low diversity of native forbs. Some sparsely distributed significant weeds, such as Serrated Tussock, are present and require control. St John’s Wort, Paterson’s Curse and Briar Rose are also present across much of the site and should be controlled before they spread further. Conservation-targeted management should be directed towards the improvement of the midstorey and understorey of the low diversity structural woodland areas, conservation of habitat values for woodland birds, and control of weeds. It is therefore recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the stocking rates, stocking timing, rotational grazing, targeted weed control works, and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. The key management priority of the site is the control of stocking rates and the control of weeds. Stocking rates should be determined to best encourage the natural regeneration of the overstorey in the structural woodland areas of the site, and to ensure appropriate levels of grass herbage mass in the Phalaris dominated areas. With respect to the natural regeneration of the overstorey, techniques such as ‘ripping’ the ground should be considered to encourage regeneration in the low diversity areas, where appropriate. Comparison to previous mapping As described in Section 3.1.2, EcoLogical Australia (2011) mapped over 2,400 ha of vegetation in the north of Canberra, including the area encompassed by Throsby North offset reserve. However, the vegetation mapping presented in EcoLogical Australia (2011) was later found to be only 23% to 80% accurate, averaging 61.25% accuracy/ha (Biosis 2012). Such inaccuracies make direct comparisons with the current study difficult. EcoLogical Australia (2011) do not provide a site-by-site description of, or total areas for, the vegetation they mapped in 2011. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison is possible between their mapping and that produced by the current study. With respect to Throsby North, EcoLogical.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 104 Australia (2011) mapped almost the entirety of the site as BGW, but only classified the northern section (both the structural woodland areas and derived grassland) as meeting the criteria for EBPC Act BGW. From their report it is difficult to determine why the remainder of the site was excluded, but the most likely explanation is that the groundlayer was recorded as exotic. If this was indeed the case, the mapping reported by EcoLogical Australia (2011) is broadly similar to that of the current study..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 105 Figure 3.8-a. Throsby North Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 106 Figure 3.8-b. Throsby North EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 107 3.9 The Pinnacle 3 .9.2 Figure 3.9-a shows the extent of the PCTs and zones for The Pinnacle and the locations of the plot- transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. The Pinnacle was found to support two PCTs: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 3.67 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 10.83 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 1.72 ha of Zone 4: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 1.67 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.18 ha of Zone 8: Exotic dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). ‘ACT25 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest’, with the following zones. • 1.45 ha of Zone 1: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Moderate to high native forb diversity. In total 16.22 ha of woodland in The Pinnacle meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.9-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 15 native species (TP_16.2.1) to 45 native species (TP_25.1.1). These two plots also set the range for the number of important species, which varied from 1 (TP_16.2.1) to 22 (TP_25.1.1). No significant weeds were found within the site. Other pest plants that were widespread include Saffron Thistle, Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Briar Rose. Figure 3.9-b shows the exotic dominance categories for The Pinnacle. The one exotic area in The Pinnacle was classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’, being a Phalaris dominated drainage line. One rare species, Pale Flax Lily Dianella longifolia var. longifolia, was recorded (Species location removed). Tables 3.9a-3.9e provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding ACT16 Zone 8, due to its small area). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step-point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 108 Table 3.9-a. The Pinnacle ACT16 Zone 1 results summary ACT16 Zone 1 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Threatened flora – Pale Flax Lily Dianella longifolia var. longifolia (Species location removed). Size 3.67 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 5 - 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 2. Perennial Groundlayer 75 - 99% native. Understorey 25-44 total native species, 18-35 native non-grass species, 8-17 important species. Exotic Species Richness 12 - 16 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse, Saffron Thistle and St John’s Wort present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 109 Table 3.9-b. The Pinnacle ACT16 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box - Red Gum Grassy Woodland Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, with a low diversity native groundlayer. Size 10.83 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 4 - 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 2 - 3. Perennial Groundlayer 60 - 77% native. Understorey 15-28 total native species, 8-18 native non-grass species, 1-4 important species. Exotic Species Richness 14 - 17 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Saffron Thistle present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 110 Table 3.9-c. The Pinnacle ACT016 Zone 4 results summary ACT16 Zone 4 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland – Derived Grassland. Overstorey and midstorey absent. Moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 1.72 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 82% native. Understorey 30 total native species, 22 native non-grass species, 8 important species. Exotic Species Richness 23 species. Significant Weeds Saffron Thistle, Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Briar Rose present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 111 Table 3.9-d. The Pinnacle ACT016 Zone 5 results summary ACT16 Zone 5 Description Native Pasture Overstorey and midstorey absent. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 1.67 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species Overstorey absent. Overstorey Cover Overstorey absent. Overstorey Regeneration No. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0. Perennial Groundlayer 67% native. Understorey 20 total native species, 12 native non-grass species, 6 important species. Exotic Species Richness 14 species. Significant Weeds Saffron Thistle and Paterson’s Curse present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 112 Table 3.9-e. The Pinnacle ACT025 Zone 1 results summary ACT25 Zone 1 Description Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest Largely intact condition with a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey and shrubstorey present, with a moderate to high diversity native groundlayer. Size 1.45 ha (1 plot-transect). Overstorey Species E. dives and E. rossii. Overstorey Cover 20%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 3. Perennial Groundlayer 93% native. Understorey 45 total native species, 38 native non-grass species, 22 important species. Exotic Species Richness 11 species. Significant Weeds St John’s Wort and Briar Rose present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 113 3 .9.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation across The Pinnacle is comprised of moderate to high diversity BGW and derived grassland, low diversity BGW and derived grassland, and two small patches of Tableland Grass/Shrub Forest. A small drainage line in the east of the site is characterised by Phalaris. The BGW groundlayer is dominated by Kangaroo Grass, Red-leg Grass, Wallaby Grasses and Spear Grasses, and includes a diverse array of native forbs. The significant ecological values of the site are the 16.22 ha of EPBC Act BGW, habitat for woodland birds, likely Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat25 and the site’s connectivity with The Pinnacle Nature Reserve to the north and Kama Nature Reserve to the south. The Pinnacle is one of the only sites in the ACT that links dry sclerophyll forest (in The Pinnacle Nature Reserve) through woodland and grassland (Kama Nature Reserve) to riparian ecosystems in the Molonglo River26, and is a logical and valuable addition to the ACT nature reserve network. The site is in a good condition and lacks many of the significant weeds that are present elsewhere in the ACT. The low diversity structural woodland areas only contain a sparse midstorey and low diversity understorey. These areas could benefit from management actions directed towards encouraging natural regeneration of the overstorey. Conservation-targeted management should be directed towards the improvement of the midstorey and understorey of the low diversity wooded areas and conservation of habitat values for woodland birds and Pink-tailed Worm-lizard. It is therefore recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the targeted works and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. With respect to the natural regeneration of the overstorey, techniques such as ‘ripping’ the ground should be considered to encourage regeneration in the low diversity areas, where appropriate. Comparison to previous mapping Umwelt (Australia) Pty Ltd mapped the vegetation in The Pinnacle offset reserve in 2013 (described in Umwelt 201427). The site was selected and assessed applying the Commonwealth biodiversity offset policy and associated calculator (Commonwealth of Australia 2012a28,2012b29). Vegetation survey effort was limited to one 20x20 m quadrat and a meandering walk through the site to map PCT boundaries and assess general site condition. Umwelt (2014) found that the site was of a high quality, contained high floristic diversity and structural integrity, a low abundance of exotic grasses, forbs and significant weeds, and was an important site in terms of landscape connectivity. This agrees well with the current study. Umwelt (2014) reported 15.5 ha of BGW, which again agrees well 25 Capital Ecology (2015). William Hovell Drive investigation area – Pink-tailed Worm-lizard survey and habitat mapping. Prepared for ACT Government – Treasury and Economic Development Directorate. Author: R. Speirs. Project no. 2692. 26 Capital Ecology (2016). Kama Nature Reserve Interface Management Strategy. Final 02 – December 2016. Prepared for ACT Government – Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Author: R. Speirs. Project no. 2717. 27 Umwelt (2014). University of Canberra Public Hospital. EPBC Act Referral Preliminary Documentation. EPBC Ref. 2013/6987. August 2014. 28 Commonwealth of Australia (2012a). Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 Environmental offset Policy. 29 Commonwealth of Australia (2012b). Guide to the use of offsets under the EPBC Act..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 114 with the 16.22 ha identified in the current study. However, this 15.5 ha was comprised of 5 ha of BGW structural woodland and 10 ha of BGW derived grassland. In contrast, the current study identifies 14.5 ha of BGW structural woodland (ACT16-Zone1 and ACT16-Zone2) and 1.74 ha of BGW derived grassland (ACT16-Zone4). The current study identified more areas of structural woodland as groups of trees were determined to be separated by no more than 75 m, thereby forming a continuous patch as outlined in the EPBC Act Policy Statement guidelines (Commonwealth of Australia 2006). Despite these differences, the two studies broadly agree on the condition of the site, the PCT boundaries, and the site’s importance in the broader landscape..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 115 Figure 3.9-a. The Pinnacle Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 116 Figure 3.9-b. The Pinnacle EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 117 3.10 Watson Woodland 3 .10.2 Figure 3.10-a shows the extent of the woodland PCT and zones for Watson Woodland and the locations of the plot-transects. The start/end locations of the plot-transects are provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. Watson Woodland was found to support one PCT: ‘ACT16 Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’, with the following zones. • 7.35 ha of Zone 2: Native dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 0.35 ha of Zone 5: Native dominant understorey – No canopy – No Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). • 10.33 ha of Zone 6: Exotic dominant understorey – Mature canopy – Regeneration of overstorey – Low native forb diversity (not meeting the EPBC Act BGW criteria). In total, 7.35 ha of woodland in Watson Woodland meets the EPBC Act BGW criteria (Figure 3.10-b). Native understorey species richness ranged from 4 native species (WW_16.6.2) to 12 native species (WW_16.2.2 and WW_16.2.3). The number of important species varied from 0 (WW_16.6.1 and WW_16.6.2) to 5 (WW_16.2.3). Significant weeds found within the site include Serrated Tussock (Zone 16.2). Other pest plants that were widespread include Paterson’s Curse and Briar Rose. Figure 3.10-b shows the exotic dominance categories for Watson Woodland. All of the exotic areas were classified as ‘Pasture and Agricultural Weed Species’. One rare species, Hoary Sunray, was recorded in numerous locations in Watson Woodland. None were in monitoring plots. Based on the history of the site it is likely that these were deliberately planted in Watson Woodland and are not naturally occurring. Tables 3.10a-3.10b provide summaries of the plot-transect results for each zone (excluding ACT16 Zone 5, due to its small area). Detailed summaries of the floristics diversity (plot) and structure (step- point transect) data for each plot-transect are provided in Appendix 1 and 2, respectively..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 118 Table 3.10-a. Watson Woodland ACT016 Zone 2 results summary ACT16 Zone 2 Description EPBC Act Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, which is partly made up of planted trees. Low diversity native groundlayer. Size 7.35 ha (3 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 1 - 1. Perennial Groundlayer 64 - 73% native. Understorey 11-12 total native species, 6-9 native non-grass species, 1-5 important species. Exotic Species Richness 10 - 12 species. Significant Weeds Serrated Tussock. Paterson’s Curse, Scotch Thistle and Briar Rose also present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 119 Table 3.10-b. Watson Woodlands ACT016 Zone 6 results summary ACT16 Zone 6 Description Yellow Box – Red Gum Woodland (exotic groundlayer). Contains a canopy representative of the climax community. Midstorey present, which is partly made up of planted trees. Low diversity exotic groundlayer dominated by Phalaris, exotic annual grasses and exotic forbs. Size 10.33 ha (2 plot-transects). Overstorey Species E. blakelyi and E. melliodora. Overstorey Cover 0 - 10%. Overstorey Regeneration Yes. No. of Trees > 125 cm DBH per 0.2 ha plot 0 - 2. Perennial Groundlayer 16 - 24% native. Understorey 4-8 total native species, 3-6 native non-grass species, 0 important species. Exotic Species Richness 12 - 12 species. Significant Weeds Paterson’s Curse, St John’s Wort and Briar Rose present..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 120 3 .10.3 Discussion and recommendations to improve woodland quality The vegetation in Watson Woodland is a mix of low diversity or exotic BGW and contains a midstorey and understorey which is partly comprised of planted trees, shrubs, forbs and grasses. The low diversity BGW groundlayer is dominated by Tall Spear Grass and contains a low diversity of native forbs. The exotic areas are dominated by exotic annual grasses and Phalaris. The site’s significant ecological values include 7.35 ha of EPBC Act BGW and habitat for woodland birds. The Watson Woodland Working Group has added significant value to the site through their plantings, weed control and other management actions. Conservation-targeted management should be conducted in conjunction with the Watson Woodland Working Group and be directed towards the continued improvement of the midstorey and understorey and conservation of habitat values for woodland birds. It is therefore recommended that a conservation-targeted management plan be prepared which prescribes a management regime for the site. This management regime should stipulate the targeted works and other focused measures that will be applied to protect and enhance the conservation values of the site. Comparison to previous mapping The vegetation within Watson Woodland (also known as Justice Robert Hope Park) was broadly assessed by David Hogg Pty Ltd (201230) during a more detailed assessment of an adjoining area. Vegetation surveys were based on guidelines set out in ACT Government (2010). Watson Woodland was found to support substantially modified Yellow Box – Red Gum woodland, dense patches of regrowth, and a mixed groundlayer where areas were either dominated by native grasses or introduced grasses (the estimated proportion of groundcover dominated by Phalaris was 10 percent). It was also noted that, as a result of management actions by the Watson Woodland Working Group, there were greater diversity planted patches of native forbs and grasses scattered throughout the site. David Hogg Pty Ltd (2012) concluded that: ‘The overall quality of the habitat throughout the Watson Woodlands…is relatively poor due to limited habitat structure, poor native groundcover content and species diversity, and proximity to urban development. The habitat within Justice Robert Hope Park is similar to that within the project site, although it has slightly improved structural diversity as the result of regeneration and rehabilitation activities.’ The description of the vegetation in Watson Woodland by David Hogg Pty Ltd (2012) is consistent with that of the current study. The current mapping goes further by mapping and quantifying the areas dominated by native or exotic groundcover, and by recording full species lists and structure information across the site. 30 David Hogg Pty Ltd (2012). Block 9 Section 94 Watson and Negus Crescent Extension Ecological Surveys and Assessment. Report prepared for ACT Land Development Agency. May 2012..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 121 Figure 3.10-a. Watson Woodland Vegetation Mapping Results.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 122 Figure 3.10-b. Watson Woodland EPBC Act BGW and Exotic Vegetation Classification.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 123 4 Summary and Conclusion Capital Ecology was commissioned by PCS to assess and map the quality and extent of the woodland within ten ACT offset reserves (‘sites’). Each site is known to support woodland which meets the definition for the BGW threatened ecological community, and/or habitat for significant fauna species such as the Golden Sun Moth and Striped Legless Lizard. The results presented in this report provide fine-scale mapping of the ten sites and establishes an accurate and reliable baseline assessment from which ongoing management and monitoring of the significant biodiversity values can be achieved. This report also establishes a reliable and repeatable four-step methodology which can be used to determine future changes in woodland quality and extent, and which will further aid management decisions by differentiating areas of exotic dominance based on the category of exotic species that this dominance is attributed to. The field surveys and mapping were timed to occur when the greatest number of woodland forbs were in full flower. This was determined from observations of known reference sites throughout the season. The weather conditions in 2017 (a dry start to winter with cold nights31 and average spring rainfall with warm days32) resulted in average conditions during the survey period (i.e. normal conditions). The only effects of the weather we noted were a low annual grass cover due to the later than usual spring rains, and poor orchid and lily emergence due to particularly cold winter nights. The low lily and orchid emergence was also observed by other practitioners in the field (Greg Baines pers. comm.; Sarah Sharp pers. comm. Nicholas Wilson pers. comm.; Rob Armstrong pers. comm.). In general, weather conditions are unlikely to have substantially influenced the results. The quality and extent of woodland in each of the sites has been mapped previously, and comparisons to the results of those studies are discussed in the subsection for each site. In general, the mapping prepared via this study is broadly consistent with that prepared previously. However, it must be noted that this was not always the case when compared to the mapping prepared by EcoLogical Australia (2011), which is discussed in detail in Section 3.1.3. In addition, the four-step mapping method employed for this study, applied with a focus on accuracy rather than time constraints, has resulted in the development of a mapping product which is far more detailed and fine-scale than that prepared previously. In this regard, it is difficult to make direct comparisons with previous mapping and thereby form conclusions regarding changes in woodland quality and extent. Such comparisons will be possible in the future providing that the four-step mapping method is employed, and survey/mapping effort are sufficient to produce appropriately accurate mapping. Table 4-a summarises the areas of EPBC Act BGW (PCT16-Zone1 to Zone4) for each site. Of the ten sites, Kinlyside and Throsby North support the greatest total area of BGW (141.1 ha and 98.23 ha, respectively), and Kenny Broadacre and Watson Woodland the least (3.22 ha and 7.35 ha, respectively). Management recommendations are provided in the subsection for each site, however common recommendations across the sites include management of grazing intensity and timing via varied stocking rates and rotational grazing, and management of noxious and/or prolific weeds. 31 Commonwealth of Australia (2017). Australian Capital Territory in winter 2017: dry season with warm days and cool nights. Bureau of Meteorology Seasonal Climate Summary for Canberra. 32 Commonwealth of Australia (2017). Australian Capital Territory in spring 2017: warmer than average days. Bureau of Meteorology Seasonal Climate Summary for Canberra..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 124 Table 4-a. Summary of the areas of EPBC Act BGW structural woodland and derived grassland Site EPBC Act BGW structural woodland (ha) Zones 1, 2 & 3 EPBC Act BGW derived grassland (ha) Zone 4 EPBC Act BGW Total (ha) Zones 1, 2, 3 & 4 Horsepark North 12.85 25.31 38.16 Isaacs Ridge 35.26 0 35.26 Kenny Broadacre 3.22 0 3.22 Kinlyside 120.77 20.33 141.10 Kenny Woodland 53.49 0.43 53.92 Taylor 5.35 4.85 10.20 Throsby East 38.36 0 38.36 Throsby North 86.50 11.73 98.23 The Pinnacle 14.50 1.72 16.22 Watson Woodland 7.35 0 7.35 Table 4-b and 4-c summarise the native characteristics of the four EPBC Act BGW zones (PCT16- Zone1 to Zone4) for each site. The benchmark scores provided by PCS for ‘ACT16: Eucalyptus melliodora – E. blakelyi Tableland Grassy Woodland’ are: • Native Species Richness (SR) = 35 species • Native Ground Cover Grass (GCG) = 23% to 63% Projected Foliage Cover (PFC) • Native Ground Cover Other (GCO) = 8% to 21% PFC. For comparison to the data presented in the current study, values for Native Ground Cover Shrub were added to the benchmark scores of GCO • Native Overstorey (NOS) = 11% to 32 % PFC; and • Native Midstorey (NMS) = 0% to 12.5% PFC. Some general conclusions can be drawn from the presented data. Apart from Kinlyside (ACT16- Zone1) and The Pinnacle (ACT16-Zone1), no other zone across any site reached the prescribed benchmarks for Native Species Richness. A similar situation occurs with respect to Native Overstorey cover for ACT16-Zone1. These results reflect the historical land management practices that have occurred across the sites (such as vegetation clearing, pasture improvement and grazing), which have impacted upon the diversity and structure of the vegetation. The Native Ground Cover Grass achieved the prescribed bench marks across all sites and zones. Apart from ACT16-Zone2, this is also true with respect to the Native Ground Cover Other. The fact that ACT16-Zone2 has values for Native Ground Cover Other far below the benchmarks is not surprising given that this zone is characterised by low diversity and indicates that these areas have been appropriately distinguished from ACT16-Zone1. To improve the current site values to the benchmarks, we recommend that management focus on preserving those areas currently of the highest quality and improving areas which have the potential to substantially improve..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 125 In general, the results presented throughout this report, and partly summarised in Table 4-b and 4-c, show that the four-step mapping method and vegetation zone classifications are appropriate for recording the quality and extent of the lowland woodland vegetation in the ACT. Significant weeds such as Serrated Tussock and Chilean Needle Grass are present at many of the sites. Serrated Tussock is particularly prolific within sections of Horsepark North and Kenny Woodland. In general, these weeds represent the foremost threat to the integrity of the botanical and fauna habitat values of the BGW in the sites. Accordingly, diligent and systematic control of these weeds (together with Briar Rose) is required to conserve and enhance the values of the sites. Also of concern are other pest plants, such as St John’s Wort, Paterson’s Curse and Saffron Thistle, which are often widespread and at high densities. These prolific weeds are likely to be having a detrimental impact in addition to that of the identified significant weeds. These weeds are often very difficult to effectively control, particularly as the targeted control method for one species may exacerbate the spread and density of other herbaceous weeds and/or the three significant grass weeds. Methods such as controlled grazing should be considered in low-diversity areas, and ecological burns in high-diversity areas. Table 4-b. Summary of average native aspects of EPBC Act BGW zones (zones 1 to 4), including Species Richness (SR), Ground Cover Grass (GCG) and Ground Cover Other (GCO). Red filled cells highlight values below the benchmark, while green filled cells indicated values that reach or exceed benchmark values. Benchmark values are presented in the main body of the text above. Site ACT16 - Zone 1 ACT16 - Zone 2 ACT16 - Zone 3 ACT16 - Zone 4 SR GCG GCO SR GCG GCO SR GCG GCO SR GCG GCO Horsepark North 31 34 11 30 59 7 Isaacs Ridge 21 34 8 Kenny Broadacre 13 39 0 Kinlyside 40 46 11 16 35 6 28 54 10 Kenny Woodland 6 40 1 20 46 10 Taylor 27 43 10 20 44 19 Throsby East 14 35 3 Throsby North 32 43 13 17 36 1 30 52 6 The Pinnacle 37 45 9 25 31 3 30 59 1 Watson Woodland 13 32 4.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 126 Table 4-c. Summary of average Native Overstorey (NOS) and Native Midstorey (NMS) aspects of EPBC Act BGW zones (zones 1 to 4). Red filled cells highlight values below the benchmark, while green filled cells indicated values that reach or exceed benchmark values. Benchmark values are presented in the main body of the text above. Site ACT16 - Zone 1 ACT16 - Zone 2 ACT16 - Zone 3 NOS NMS NOS NMS NOS NMS Horsepark North 8 14 Isaacs Ridge 6 20 Kenny Broadacre 15 0 Kinlyside 11 11 11 15 Kenny Woodland 10 7 Taylor 1 18 Throsby East 10 9 Throsby North 13 12 6 2 The Pinnacle 8 10 6 2 Watson Woodland 10 27.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 127 References ACT Government (1999). Yellow Box – Red Gum Grassy Woodland: An endangered ecological community. Action Plan No. 10. Environment ACT, Canberra. ACT Government (2004). Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. Action Plan No. 27. Environment ACT, Canberra. ACT Government (2010). Survey guidelines for determining lowland vegetation classification and condition in the ACT. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate – Conservation Planning and Research. ACT Government (2015a). Monitoring Guidelines for Box-Gum Woodlands. Conservation Research, October 2015. ACT Government (2015b). ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Assessment Methodology. Environment and Planning. May 2015. ACT Government (2015c). ACT Vegetation Types Database – Attachment to the ACT Environmental Offsets Calculator Assessment Methodology. 18 May 2015. ACT Government (2015d). Pest Plants and Animals (Pest Plants) Declaration 2015 (no 1). Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel. 16 April 2015. Biosis (2012). Vegetation Community Mapping – Confidence Testing within the Gungahlin Strategic Environmental Assessment Area. Survey Report for the Land Development Agency. Project no. 15800. Biosis Research (2011). Kenny – Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) Survey Report. Author: R. Speirs Unpublished report to the ACT Government. Biosis Research (2012). Kenny and Throsby – Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) Survey Report. Author: R. Speirs. Unpublished report to the ACT Government. Capital Ecology (2015). William Hovell Drive investigation area – Pink-tailed Worm-lizard survey and habitat mapping. Prepared for ACT Government – Treasury and Economic Development Directorate. Author: R. Speirs. Project no. 2692. Capital Ecology (2016). Kama Nature Reserve Interface Management Strategy. Final 02 – December 2016. Prepared for ACT Government – Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Author: R. Speirs. Project no. 2717. Capital Ecology (2017a). ACT Environmental Offsets – 2016 Grassland Mapping Report. Prepared for ACT Government Parks and Conservation Service. Capital Ecology (2017b). Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary – Goorooyarroo Extension of Predator- proof Fence – Ecological Impact Assessment and Environmental Significance Opinion Supporting Document. Capital Ecology project no. 2709. Capital Ecology (2018). 2017 Grassland Quality and Extent Mapping – ACT Government Environmental Offsets. Prepared for the ACT Government Parks and Conservation Service..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 128 Commonwealth of Australia (2006). Policy Statement 3.5: White Box – Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodlands and derived native grasslands. Commonwealth Department of Environment and Heritage. Commonwealth of Australia (2012a). Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 Environmental offset Policy. Commonwealth of Australia (2012b). Guide to the use of offsets under the EPBC Act. Commonwealth of Australia (2017). Australian Capital Territory in winter 2017: dry season with warm days and cool nights. Bureau of Meteorology Seasonal Climate Summary for Canberra. Commonwealth of Australia (2017). Australian Capital Territory in spring 2017: warmer than average days. Bureau of Meteorology Seasonal Climate Summary for Canberra. David Hogg Pty Ltd (2011). Kenny Ecological Surveys. Report prepared for ACT Planning and Land Authority. February 2011. David Hogg Pty Ltd (2012). Block 9 Section 94 Watson and Negus Crescent Extension Ecological Surveys and Assessment. Report prepared for ACT Land Development Agency. May 2012. EcoLogical Australia (2011). Gungahlin Vegetation Survey and Mapping Report. Ecological Communities and Threatened Species within the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Area. Prepared for Conservation Planning and Research, ACT Government. Maguire O. and Mulvaney M. (2011). Box-Gum Woodland in the ACT. Technical Report 25. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. NSW Government (2014). BioBanking Assessment Methodology 2014. NSW Government Office of Environment and Heritage. NSW Government (2017). Biodiversity Assessment Method. Office of Environment and Heritage. Rehwinkel (2007). A Method to Assess Grassy Ecosystem Sites: Using floristic information to assess a site’s quality. NSW Department of Environment and Climate Change. Sharp and Gould (2010). ACT Vegetation Monitoring Manual, A step by step guide to monitoring native vegetation in the ACT. Environment ACT, Canberra. Umwelt (2012). Ecological Assessment of Proposed Offset Site for the Mugga Land Resource Management Centre. Prepared for ACT NoWaste. March 2012. Umwelt (2014). University of Canberra Public Hospital. EPBC Act Referral Preliminary Documentation. EPBC Ref. 2013/6987. August 2014..
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 129 Appendices.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 130 Appendix 1. Plot Data Summary Tables Table A1-0-a. Horsepark North plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Horsepark North 16 1 HN_16.1.1 692576 6109371 692649 6109436 E. bridgesiana 15 Y 33 27 12 13 2 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum Yes HN_16.1.2 693253 6109941 693243 6109838 E. melliodora 5 Y 30 25 13 5 1 N. trichotoma HN_16.1.3 693748 6110260 693720 6110357 E. melliodora 5 Y 23 21 9 11 3 N. trichotoma E. vulgare R. rubiginosa 4 HN_16.4.1 693679 6110219 693780 6110206 0 N 32 26 10 11 2 N. trichotoma H. perforatum Yes HN_16.4.2 693145 6110004 693131 6109900 0 N 31 27 11 9 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa HN_16.4.3 692739 6109317 692695 6109227 0 N 20 17 5 20 3 N. trichotoma H. perforatum R. rubiginosa HN_16.4.4 692762 6109563 692812 6109651 0 N 35 30 12 10 1 R. rubiginosa 8 HN_16.8.1 692611 6109255 692555 6109175 0 N 12 11 2 21 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa No 25 1 HN_25.1.1 692989 6110029 692901 6109981 E. nortonii 20 Y 29 24 12 12 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa No HN_25.1.2 693287 6110132 693385 6110110 E. macrorhyncha 22 Y 42 32 15 7 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa HN_25.1.3 694429 6110188 694522 6110257 E. macrorhyncha 5 Y 21 13 6 3 1 N. trichotoma HN_25.1.4 693996 6110214 694097 6110206 E. macrorhyncha 10 Y 23 16 8 1 1 N. trichotoma 4 HN_25.4.1 693097 6110086 693191 6110116 0 N 25 20 8 7 1 N. trichotoma No HN_25.4.2 694223 6110205 694323 6110217 0 N 18 17 6 5 1 N. trichotoma HN_25.4.3 693889 6110332 693907 6110432 0 N 31 26 9 6 1 N. trichotoma.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 131 Table A1-0-b. Isaacs Ridge plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non-grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Isaacs Ridge 16 1 IR_16.1.1 693815 6081916 693803 6082018 E. melliodora 2 Y 19 13 4 16 4 E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Yes IR_16.1.2 693930 6082269 693828 6082270 E. melliodora 5 Y 25 19 7 15 4 R. fruticosus A. baileyana E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa IR_16.1.3 693712 6082942 693747 6082848 E. nortonii E. polyanthemos 10 Y 19 14 5 16 4 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa IR_16.1.4 693561 6083634 693573 6083536 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 6 Y 12 9 0 15 4 R. fruticosus E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa 6 IR_16.6.1 693929 6082015 693989 6081936 E. melliodora 0.2 Y 6 5 0 15 2 E. plantagineum H. perforatum No.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 132 Table A1-0-c. Kenny Broadacre plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Kenny Broadacre 16 2 KB_16.2.1 698002 6101431 698085 6101486 E. mannifera E. melliodora 10 Y 10 3 0 6 0 Yes KB_16.2.2 697984 6101598 698028 6101508 E. macrorhyncha E. melliodora 10 Y 8 2 0 6 0 KB_16.2.3 698157 6101446 698254 6101452 E. melliodora E. dives 25 Y 11 6 2 7 1 N. trichotoma 5 KB_16.5.1 697693 6101839 697776 6101781 0 N 13 5 2 8 1 N. trichotoma No KB_16.5.2 697837 6101663 697869 6101569 0 N 6 1 0 7 0 8 KB_16.8.1 697707 6101739 697792 6101686 0 N 0 0 0 7 0 No KB_16.8.2 698295 6101305 698208 6101355 0 N 2 0 0 7 1 N. trichotoma 25 2 KB_25.2.1 698147 6101550 698240 6101512 E. macrorhyncha 10 N 5 1 0 8 0 No 5 KB_25.5.1 697899 6101866 697929 6101771 0 N 11 5 0 8 0 No KB_25.5.2 697979 6101715 698040 6101637 0 N 11 4 0 9 0.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 133 Table A1-0-d. Kinlyside plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Kinlyside 16 1 Ki_16.1.1 690559 6107988 690493 6108067 E. blakelyi 10 Y 44 40 15 20 3 N. trichotoma C. monogyna R. rubiginosa Yes Ki_16.1.2 690352 6107509 690264 6107462 E. melliodora 15 Y 40 33 15 5 1 H. perforatum Ki_16.1.3 689881 6107346 689860 6107443 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 20 Y 34 29 14 22 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa Ki_16.1.4 690418 6106905 690489 6106835 E. melliodora 5 Y 34 27 10 19 4 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Ki_16.1.5 690062 6106707 690155 6106667 E. blakelyi 5 Y 38 30 16 12 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa 2 Ki_16.2.1 689497 6105857 689594 6105842 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 11 7 0 10 3 E. plantagineum O. acanthium R. rubiginosa Yes Ki_16.2.2 689751 6106179 689806 6106260 E. blakelyi 10 Y 21 15 9 10 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa Ki_16.2.3 689700 6106150 689605 6106114 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 11 9 3 13 5 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum O. acanthium R. rubiginosa Ki_16.2.4 689667 6105501 689712 6105584 E. blakelyi 15 Y 13 9 2 13 1 R. rubiginosa 4 Ki_16.4.1 689689 6107351 689744 6107434 0 N 24 17 4 26 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa Yes Ki_16.4.2 689254 6106782 689251 6106881 0 N 33 29 13 14 0 Ki_16.4.3 689640 6106863 689685 6106953 0 N 26 19 6 16 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa 5 Ki_16.5.1 689544 6105533 689503 6105442 0 N 14 8 1 16 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa No Ki_16.5.2 689674 6106353 689746 6106422 0 N 11 6 3 11 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 134 Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW 6 Ki_16.6.1 689791 6105862 689816 6105958 E. blakelyi E. macrorhyncha 10 N 7 6 0 14 4 E. plantagineum H. perforatum O. acanthium R. rubiginosa No 25 1 Ki_25.1.1 690329 6107823 690298 6107728 E. macrorhyncha E. nortonii 20 Y 23 20 10 3 0 No Ki_25.1.2 690493 6107477 690552 6107554 E. macrorhyncha E. mannifera 20 Y 33 25 12 7 1 R. rubiginosa Ki_25.1.3 690468 6107193 690564 6107219 E. nortonii 15 Y 35 28 13 10 1 R. rubiginosa Ki_25.1.4 690077 6107088 689996 6107145 E. macrorhyncha E. nortonii 10 Y 33 27 16 5 0 Ki_25.1.5 690211 6106627 690298 6106590 E. macrorhyncha E. nortonii 10 Y 44 36 20 10 1 N. trichotoma 2 Ki_25.2.1 689897 6106201 689820 6106153 E. macrorhyncha E. nortonii 15 N 16 10 2 13 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa No Ki_25.2.2 689886 6105803 689926 6105898 E. macrorhyncha 5 Y 14 9 2 17 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa Ki_25.2.3 689954 6105670 689867 6105721 E. macrorhyncha 10 Y 15 10 4 8 1 C. lanatus 4 Ki_25.4.1 689190 6107079 689247 6107161 0 N 28 20 8 15 1 R. rubiginosa No Ki_25.4.2 690697 6107410 690751 6107329 0 N 17 13 4 15 3 N. trichotoma C. lanatus H. perforatum Ki_25.4.3 690578 6106777 690570 6106675 0 N 15 10 3 15 3 E. vulgare H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Ki_25.4.4 689474 6107216 689518 6107305 0 N 28 24 11 11 0 6 Ki_25.6.1 690747 6107628 690777 6107718 E. macrorhyncha E. nortonii 20 N 9 7 1 13 4 N. trichotoma C. lanatus E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa No 8 Ki_25.8.1 690752 6107740 690762 6107839 0 N 5 2 1 19 3 C. lanatus E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa No.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 135 Table A1-0-e. Kenny Woodland plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Kenny Woodland 16 2 KW_16.2.1 697430 6101101 697349 6101042 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 2 1 0 8 2 N. trichotoma O. acanthium Yes KW_16.2.2 697361 6100682 697381 6100781 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 4 Y 4 3 0 14 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa KW_16.2.3 697010 6100616 696956 6100530 E. melliodora 10 Y 3 2 0 9 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum O. acanthium KW_16.2.4 696828 6100260 696918 6100220 E. melliodora 15 N 4 3 0 9 2 N. trichotoma O. acanthium KW_16.2.5 696515 6100535 696569 6100455 E. blakelyi 10 Y 11 7 2 12 2 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum 4 KW_16.4.1 696471 6100290 696495 6100388 0 N 20 14 5 10 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa Yes 5 KW_16.5.1 696723 6100933 696782 6101011 0 N 3 2 0 10 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa No KW_16.5.2 696902 6100724 696809 6100758 0 N 5 4 0 10 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum O. acanthium KW_16.5.3 697089 6100264 697188 6100284 0 N 4 3 0 13 4 L. ferocissimum N. trichotoma E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa 6 KW_16.6.1 697059 6101148 697154 6101114 E. blakelyi 20 Y 4 4 1 10 3 N. trichotoma C. monogyna E. plantagineum No KW_16.6.2 696890 6101057 696981 6101094 E. blakelyi 10 Y 4 3 0 5 0 8 KW_16.8.1 697191 6100746 697115 6100810 0 N 4 3 0 9 0 No KW_16.8.2 696444 6100183 696544 6100187 0 N 3 2 0 14 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum O. acanthium.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 136 Table A1-0-f. Taylor plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non-grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Taylor 16 1 Ta_16.1.1 691410 6109098 691309 6109110 0 Y 28 23 12 16 1 N. trichotoma Yes Ta_16.1.2 691169 6109487 691234 6109409 E. blakelyi 0.2 Y 30 26 12 19 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa Ta_16.1.3 691321 6109226 691248 6109294 E. blakelyi 2 Y 19 16 12 19 3 N. trichotoma H. perforatum R. rubiginosa 4 Ta_16.4.1 691073 6109072 691173 6109064 0 N 23 17 7 18 3 N. trichotoma H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Yes Ta_16.4.2 691232 6109330 691131 6109334 0 N 15 12 4 17 3 N. trichotoma H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Ta_16.4.3 691249 6109359 691326 6109423 0 N 22 17 8 19 3 N. trichotoma C. lanatus R. rubiginosa 6 Ta_16.6.1 691289 6109084 691384 6109055 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 16 10 4 18 3 N. trichotoma H. perforatum R. rubiginosa No 25 1 Ta_25.1.1 690604 6109335 690695 6109372 E bridgesiana E. rossii 30 N 20 16 2 8 2 N. trichotoma R. rubiginosa No Ta_25.1.2 691017 6109437 691039 6109530 E. macrorhyncha 5 Y 40 35 16 14 2 N. trichotoma H. perforatum Ta_25.1.3 691396 6109421 691398 6109323 E. macrorhyncha 10 Y 36 32 17 5 1 N. trichotoma 4 Ta_25.4.1 691323 6109549 691347 6109648 0 N 42 34 14 18 3 N. trichotoma C. lanatus R. rubiginosa No Ta_25.4.2 690991 6109337 691066 6109274 0 N 28 23 7 15 2 C. lanatus R. rubiginosa Ta_25.4.3 690756 6109302 690779 6109205 0 N 27 17 4 18 3 C. lanatus H. perforatum R. rubiginosa 7 Ta_25.7.1 690800 6109167 690893 6109153 E bridgesiana 5 N 5 3 0 17 4 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa No.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 137 Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non-grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW 8 Ta_25.8.1 690828 6109134 690917 6109104 0 N 5 3 0 15 4 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa No.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 138 Table A1-0-g. Throsby East plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non-grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Throsby East 16 2 TE_16.2.1 697473 6103816 697433 6103724 E. melliodora 10 Y 15 9 3 11 0 Yes TE_16.2.2 697436 6103344 697418 6103246 E. blakelyi 10 Y 14 8 1 17 1 N. trichotoma TE_16.2.3 698198 6102765 698226 6102670 E. blakelyi 10 Y 14 6 0 11 0 TE_16.2.4 698382 6102826 698336 6102739 E. blakelyi 10 Y 7 1 0 16 0 5 TE_16.5.1 698372 6102940 698420 6103028 0 N 8 3 0 11 0 No TE_16.5.2 698046 6102749 697964 6102692 0 N 12 6 1 13 1 R. rubiginosa TE_16.5.3 697655 6102523 697617 6102431 0 N 12 6 1 16 2 C. lanatus E. plantagineum 6 TE_16.6.1 698203 6102437 698104 6102455 E. melliodora 5 Y 4 2 0 6 0 No TE_16.6.2 697537 6102329 697468 6102400 E. melliodora 5 N 12 5 1 13 2 N. trichotoma O. acanthium 8 TE_16.8.1 697462 6102619 697484 6102717 0 N 5 0 0 9 1 N. trichotoma No TE_16.8.2 698016 6102947 698063 6103036 0 N 8 4 0 12 2 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum 25 2 TE_25.2.1 697550 6103264 697582 6103361 E. rossii 10 Y 12 5 1 10 1 E. plantagineum No TE_25.2.2 697629 6103094 697548 6103040 E. rossii 25 N 23 12 4 9 0 TE_25.2.3 697850 6103062 697751 6103078 E. rossii 20 N 8 4 0 10 0.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 139 Table A1-0-h. Throsby North plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Throsby North 16 1 TN_16.1.1 697594 6105903 697574 6105806 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 39 31 13 10 1 H. perforatum Yes TN_16.1.2 697640 6105541 697583 6105457 E. melliodora 10 Y 28 19 6 10 3 E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa TN_16.1.3 698448 6105825 698441 6105725 E. blakelyi 10 Y 17 10 4 13 3 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum TN_16.1.4 698337 6105141 698406 6105215 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 20 Y 33 25 13 7 1 R. rubiginosa 2 TN_16.2.1 698034 6105840 698051 6105742 E. melliodora 2 Y 16 7 3 11 4 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Yes TN_16.2.2 697950 6105348 697899 6105432 E. melliodora 5 Y 17 8 2 16 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa TN_16.2.3 697670 6104748 697694 6104844 E. melliodora 10 Y 13 6 1 9 0 TN_16.2.4 697569 6104475 697664 6104510 E. blakelyi 5 N 14 5 2 13 0 4 TN_16.4.1 698270 6105615 698369 6105634 0 N 25 16 9 15 2 E. plantagineum H. perforatum Yes TN_16.4.2 698362 6105375 698391 6105472 0 N 31 21 9 9 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa TN_16.4.3 698279 6105210 698307 6105308 0 N 34 25 12 17 4 N. trichotoma E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa 5 TN_16.5.1 697818 6104659 697749 6104586 0 N 14 6 0 8 0 No TN_16.5.2 697773 6104955 697871 6104961 0 N 15 8 2 13 0 6 TN_16.6.1 697672 6105130 697591 6105189 E. blakelyi 10 Y 8 2 0 9 1 E. plantagineum No TN_16.6.2 697353 6104773 697434 6104829 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 30 Y 7 3 2 9 0 TN_16.6.3 697336 6104334 697247 6104288 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 N 6 2 0 11 0 8 TN_16.8.1 696916 6104730 696923 6104630 0 N 5 2 0 10 1 O. acanthium No TN_16.8.2 697039 6104734 697080 6104645 0 N 7 2 0 6 0.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 140 Table A1-0-i. The Pinnacle plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW The Pinnacle 16 1 TP_16.1.1 685070 6095816 685008 6095894 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 44 35 17 12 1 E. plantagineum Yes TP_16.1.2 685027 6095927 684926 6095932 E. melliodora 5 Y 25 18 8 16 3 C. lanatus E. plantagineum H. perforatum 2 TP_16.2.1 685189 6095981 685155 6095886 E. blakelyi 5 N 15 8 1 15 2 C. lanatus E. plantagineum Yes TP_16.2.2 684994 6096088 685056 6096012 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 4 N 24 14 2 17 1 C. lanatus TP_16.2.3 685166 6096107 685141 6096203 E. blakelyi 10 Y 28 18 4 14 2 E. plantagineum H. perforatum 4 TP_16.4.1 685131 6095740 685059 6095672 0 N 30 22 8 23 4 C. lanatus E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa Yes 5 TP_16.5.1 685040 6096150 684941 6096135 0 N 20 12 6 14 2 C. lanatus E. plantagineum No 25 1 TP_25.1.1 685102 6095780 685005 6095782 E. dives E. rossii 20 Y 45 38 22 11 2 H. perforatum R. rubiginosa No.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 141 Table A1-0-j. Watson Woodland plot data summary Site PCT Zone Plot ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Dominant overstorey species Overstorey cover Regeneration of overstory Native understorey spp Native understorey non- grass spp Important spp Exotic spp Significant weeds Significant weed spp. (WoNS in bold) EPBC BGW Watson Woodland 16 2 WW_16.2.1 696889 6098868 696932 6098779 E. melliodora 10 Y 11 7 1 12 2 E. plantagineum R. rubiginosa Yes WW_16.2.2 696995 6098754 697075 6098814 E. melliodora 10 Y 12 6 1 10 2 E. plantagineum O. acanthium WW_16.2.3 696987 6098677 697085 6098662 E. melliodora 10 Y 12 9 5 10 2 N trichotoma E. plantagineum 6 WW_16.6.1 696831 6098671 696912 6098724 E. blakelyi E. melliodora 10 Y 8 6 0 12 1 E. plantagineum No WW_16.6.2 697052 6098459 696952 6098426 0 Y 4 3 0 12 3 E. plantagineum H. perforatum R. rubiginosa.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 142 Appendix 2. Step-Point Transect Data Summary Table Table A2-0-a. Transect data summary Site PCT Zone Transect ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Length (m) Crypt Bare Rock Litter Ann Ex Grass Per Ex Grass Ex Broadleaf Per Native Grass Other Native Percent Perennial Native Horsepark North 16 1 HN_16.1.1 692576 6109371 692649 6109436 100 1 2 0 16 11 0 16 47 12 78.67 HN_16.1.2 693253 6109941 693243 6109838 100 1 4 0 35 0 5 1 46 10 90.32 HN_16.1.3 693748 6110260 693720 6110357 100 0 0 0 70 3 1 5 10 10 76.92 4 HN_16.4.1 693679 6110219 693780 6110206 100 14 6 0 0 0 32 9 45 6 55.43 HN_16.4.2 693145 6110004 693131 6109900 100 1 0 0 0 1 0 15 85 12 86.61 HN_16.4.3 692739 6109317 692695 6109227 100 0 1 0 37 12 7 19 25 4 52.73 HN_16.4.4 692762 6109563 692812 6109651 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 80 6 81.13 8 HN_16.8.1 692611 6109255 692555 6109175 100 0 1 0 5 9 71 16 4 2 6.45 25 1 HN_25.1.1 692989 6110029 692901 6109981 100 3 7 9 34 0 1 2 47 4 94.44 HN_25.1.2 693287 6110132 693385 6110110 100 6 2 4 26 1 0 3 48 8 94.92 HN_25.1.3 694429 6110188 694522 6110257 100 2 8 0 56 3 0 0 30 12 100.00 HN_25.1.4 693996 6110214 694097 6110206 100 13 12 0 35 0 0 1 36 5 97.62 4 HN_25.4.1 693097 6110086 693191 6110116 100 6 1 4 0 0 1 5 73 21 94.00 HN_25.4.2 694223 6110205 694323 6110217 100 3 4 0 4 0 2 10 45 43 88.00 HN_25.4.3 693889 6110332 693907 6110432 100 16 6 0 14 1 0 8 54 7 88.41 Isaacs Ridge 16 1 IR_16.1.1 693815 6081916 693803 6082018 100 1 5 0 21 12 4 14 42 1 70.49 IR_16.1.2 693930 6082269 693828 6082270 100 0 2 0 21 12 1 11 26 21 79.66 IR_16.1.3 693712 6082942 693747 6082848 100 7 1 0 27 5 0 14 34 7 74.55 IR_16.1.4 693561 6083634 693573 6083536 100 0 1 0 21 9 1 26 34 1 56.45 6 IR_16.6.1 693929 6082015 693989 6081936 100 0 0 0 5 8 66 1 15 0 18.29 Kenny Broadacre 16 2 KB_16.2.1 698002 6101431 698085 6101486 100 0 0 0 22 25 17 4 31 1 60.38 KB_16.2.2 697984 6101598 698028 6101508 100 0 0 0 11 27 14 2 47 0 74.60 KB_16.2.3 698157 6101446 698254 6101452 100 0 12 0 21 14 11 5 40 0 71.43 5 KB_16.5.1 697693 6101839 697776 6101781 100 1 3 0 13 2 0 4 75 4 95.18 KB_16.5.2 697837 6101663 697869 6101569 100 0 0 0 8 7 42 1 43 1 50.57 8 KB_16.8.1 697707 6101739 697792 6101686 100 0 0 0 4 9 82 4 0 0 0.00 KB_16.8.2 698295 6101305 698208 6101355 100 0 0 0 1 13 74 12 4 0 4.44 25 2 KB_25.2.1 698147 6101550 698240 6101512 100 0 0 0 11 13 20 21 37 1 48.10 5 KB_25.5.1 697899 6101866 697929 6101771 100 8 2 1 5 12 3 19 55 1 71.79 KB_25.5.2 697979 6101715 698040 6101637 100 0 0 0 5 18 35 4 36 3 50.00.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 143 Site PCT Zone Transect ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Length (m) Crypt Bare Rock Litter Ann Ex Grass Per Ex Grass Ex Broadleaf Per Native Grass Other Native Percent Perennial Native Kinlyside 16 1 Ki_16.1.1 690559 6107988 690493 6108067 100 0 0 1 4 4 8 20 54 11 69.89 Ki_16.1.2 690352 6107509 690264 6107462 100 3 4 2 11 6 0 7 56 16 91.14 Ki_16.1.3 689881 6107346 689860 6107443 100 3 4 2 18 11 4 19 28 6 59.65 Ki_16.1.4 690418 6106905 690489 6106835 100 5 1 4 2 7 0 24 49 9 70.73 Ki_16.1.5 690062 6106707 690155 6106667 100 5 3 1 20 7 0 7 45 12 89.06 2 Ki_16.2.1 689497 6105857 689594 6105842 100 0 0 0 22 6 1 29 40 5 60.00 Ki_16.2.2 689751 6106179 689806 6106260 100 3 2 1 23 12 1 9 34 8 80.77 Ki_16.2.3 689700 6106150 689605 6106114 100 1 3 0 13 33 10 18 24 9 54.10 Ki_16.2.4 689667 6105501 689712 6105584 100 0 0 0 7 7 30 11 43 3 52.87 4 Ki_16.4.1 689689 6107351 689744 6107434 100 2 4 3 0 15 0 26 38 2 60.61 Ki_16.4.2 689254 6106782 689251 6106881 100 0 0 0 0 9 0 10 62 11 87.95 Ki_16.4.3 689640 6106863 689685 6106953 100 0 0 0 0 6 0 15 63 16 84.04 5 Ki_16.5.1 689544 6105533 689503 6105442 100 1 1 2 0 10 3 43 52 0 53.06 Ki_16.5.2 689674 6106353 689746 6106422 100 0 16 0 2 10 4 26 42 0 58.33 6 Ki_16.6.1 689791 6105862 689816 6105958 100 0 0 5 19 17 8 26 29 1 46.88 25 1 Ki_25.1.1 690329 6107823 690298 6107728 100 5 11 3 38 4 0 0 32 9 100.00 Ki_25.1.2 690493 6107477 690552 6107554 100 12 9 0 32 2 0 2 27 16 95.56 Ki_25.1.3 690468 6107193 690564 6107219 100 19 2 2 44 5 1 2 21 3 88.89 Ki_25.1.4 690077 6107088 689996 6107145 100 8 7 3 39 7 0 0 21 13 100.00 Ki_25.1.5 690211 6106627 690298 6106590 100 11 7 9 28 7 0 5 23 10 86.84 2 Ki_25.2.1 689897 6106201 689820 6106153 100 0 0 9 11 26 9 14 37 1 62.30 Ki_25.2.2 689886 6105803 689926 6105898 100 5 0 5 5 8 2 35 42 2 54.32 Ki_25.2.3 689954 6105670 689867 6105721 100 3 0 4 7 13 0 29 48 0 62.34 4 Ki_25.4.1 689190 6107079 689247 6107161 100 0 3 1 1 16 0 31 35 14 61.25 Ki_25.4.2 690697 6107410 690751 6107329 100 1 1 4 0 9 0 34 44 2 57.50 Ki_25.4.3 690578 6106777 690570 6106675 100 1 0 0 3 16 0 27 45 2 63.51 Ki_25.4.4 689474 6107216 689518 6107305 100 0 2 0 2 7 0 13 53 25 85.71 6 Ki_25.6.1 690747 6107628 690777 6107718 100 6 2 4 12 30 4 26 14 0 31.82 8 Ki_25.8.1 690752 6107740 690762 6107839 100 0 1 6 4 18 10 45 17 0 23.61 Kenny Woodland 16 2 KW_16.2.1 697430 6101101 697349 6101042 100 0 0 0 10 36 12 3 44 0 74.58 KW_16.2.2 697361 6100682 697381 6100781 100 0 0 0 15 22 25 4 35 0 54.69 KW_16.2.
3 697010 6100616 696956 6100530 100 0 1 0 7 29 12 9 42 0 66.67 KW_16.2.4 696828 6100260 696918 6100220 100 0 0 0 8 35 16 5 34 2 63.16 KW_16.2.5 696515 6100535 696569 6100455 100 0 0 0 12 10 24 1 47 1 65.75.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 144 Site PCT Zone Transect ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Length (m) Crypt Bare Rock Litter Ann Ex Grass Per Ex Grass Ex Broadleaf Per Native Grass Other Native Percent Perennial Native 4 KW_16.4.1 696471 6100290 696495 6100388 100 0 0 0 0 26 8 12 46 10 73.68 5 KW_16.5.1 696723 6100933 696782 6101011 100 0 0 0 7 24 16 8 47 1 66.67 KW_16.5.2 696902 6100724 696809 6100758 100 0 1 0 3 35 5 19 31 3 58.62 KW_16.5.3 697089 6100264 697188 6100284 100 0 0 0 8 40 9 11 34 0 62.96 6 KW_16.6.1 697059 6101148 697154 6101114 100 0 0 0 1 10 76 1 9 2 12.50 KW_16.6.2 696890 6101057 696981 6101094 100 0 1 0 1 0 93 0 1 1 2.11 8 KW_16.8.1 697191 6100746 697115 6100810 100 0 0 0 3 7 75 4 4 4 9.20 KW_16.8.2 696444 6100183 696544 6100187 100 0 0 0 0 32 56 8 2 4 8.57 Taylor 16 1 Ta_16.1.1 691410 6109098 691309 6109110 100 0 10 0 20 23 8 10 15 9 57.14 Ta_16.1.2 691169 6109487 691234 6109409 100 0 0 1 0 6 10 21 57 12 69.00 Ta_16.1.3 691321 6109226 691248 6109294 100 0 2 0 9 7 1 12 58 8 83.54 4 Ta_16.4.1 691073 6109072 691173 6109064 100 1 6 0 0 9 5 29 57 10 66.34 Ta_16.4.2 691232 6109330 691131 6109334 100 0 2 0 0 0 1 31 51 12 66.32 Ta_16.4.3 691249 6109359 691326 6109423 100 0 2 0 0 0 4 35 25 36 61.00 6 Ta_16.6.1 691289 6109084 691384 6109055 100 0 2 0 3 36 50 10 4 1 7.69 25 1 Ta_25.1.1 690604 6109335 690695 6109372 100 0 0 9 21 24 13 5 17 12 61.70 Ta_25.1.2 691017 6109437 691039 6109530 100 5 1 3 24 12 0 5 43 8 91.07 Ta_25.1.3 691396 6109421 691398 6109323 100 0 6 8 18 0 0 3 46 18 95.52 4 Ta_25.4.1 691323 6109549 691347 6109648 100 4 1 0 1 2 0 26 61 8 72.63 Ta_25.4.2 690991 6109337 691066 6109274 100 1 0 6 0 3 8 19 57 10 71.28 Ta_25.4.3 690756 6109302 690779 6109205 100 0 1 0 2 27 11 15 40 4 62.86 7 Ta_25.7.1 690800 6109167 690893 6109153 100 0 0 0 1 39 38 26 24 0 27.27 8 Ta_25.8.1 690828 6109134 690917 6109104 100 0 0 0 0 55 44 25 7 0 9.21 Throsby East 16 2 TE_16.2.1 697473 6103816 697433 6103724 100 1 0 0 8 10 0 36 42 3 55.56 TE_16.2.2 697436 6103344 697418 6103246 100 1 0 2 22 18 8 16 22 9 56.36 TE_16.2.3 698198 6102765 698226 6102670 100 0 1 0 5 18 19 11 40 1 57.75 TE_16.2.4 698382 6102826 698336 6102739 100 0 1 0 15 8 6 28 37 0 52.11 5 TE_16.5.1 698372 6102940 698420 6103028 100 0 0 0 6 25 1 27 37 0 56.92 TE_16.5.2 698046 6102749 697964 6102692 100 0 0 0 8 28 16 10 36 0 58.06 TE_16.5.3 697655 6102523 697617 6102431 100 0 1 0 4 20 15 21 38 1 52.00 6 TE_16.6.1 698203 6102437 698104 6102455 100 0 0 0 4 0 89 0 0 0 0.00 TE_16.6.
2 697537 6102329 697468 6102400 100 0 0 0 5 12 59 7 14 1 18.52 8 TE_16.8.1 697462 6102619 697484 6102717 100 0 0 0 8 22 27 25 14 0 21.21 TE_16.8.2 698016 6102947 698063 6103036 100 0 0 0 3 24 38 14 13 0 20.00.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 145 Site PCT Zone Transect ID Start Easting Start Northing End Easting End Northing Length (m) Crypt Bare Rock Litter Ann Ex Grass Per Ex Grass Ex Broadleaf Per Native Grass Other Native Percent Perennial Native 25 2 TE_25.2.1 697550 6103264 697582 6103361 100 0 1 3 20 8 1 10 40 17 83.82 TE_25.2.2 697629 6103094 697548 6103040 100 1 0 1 19 26 2 8 29 14 81.13 TE_25.2.3 697850 6103062 697751 6103078 100 0 0 0 22 21 14 11 26 3 53.70 Throsby North 16 1 TN_16.1.1 697594 6105903 697574 6105806 100 6 6 0 16 3 0 10 39 16 84.62 TN_16.1.2 697640 6105541 697583 6105457 100 0 2 0 24 3 0 20 39 8 70.15 TN_16.1.3 698448 6105825 698441 6105725 100 2 1 0 7 17 0 16 51 2 76.81 TN_16.1.4 698337 6105141 698406 6105215 100 0 1 0 9 12 2 7 43 24 88.16 2 TN_16.2.1 698034 6105840 698051 6105742 100 0 0 0 13 7 8 20 46 1 62.67 TN_16.2.2 697950 6105348 697899 6105432 100 3 0 0 7 19 9 23 34 1 52.24 TN_16.2.3 697670 6104748 697694 6104844 100 0 1 0 21 17 14 9 29 1 56.60 TN_16.2.4 697569 6104475 697664 6104510 100 0 1 0 11 10 5 29 35 2 52.11 4 TN_16.4.1 698270 6105615 698369 6105634 100 4 1 0 8 13 0 17 50 6 76.71 TN_16.4.2 698362 6105375 698391 6105472 100 2 0 0 11 4 0 25 50 6 69.14 TN_16.4.3 698279 6105210 698307 6105308 100 0 0 0 2 10 0 26 55 5 69.77 5 TN_16.5.1 697818 6104659 697749 6104586 100 0 0 0 1 6 2 33 52 0 59.77 TN_16.5.2 697773 6104955 697871 6104961 100 2 6 0 4 4 7 32 39 2 51.25 6 TN_16.6.1 697672 6105130 697591 6105189 100 0 0 0 5 8 58 18 6 0 7.32 TN_16.6.2 697353 6104773 697434 6104829 100 0 1 0 13 5 42 9 19 2 29.17 TN_16.6.3 697336 6104334 697247 6104288 100 0 0 0 1 3 29 27 34 1 38.46 8 TN_16.8.1 696916 6104730 696923 6104630 100 0 0 0 2 4 55 25 4 0 4.76 TN_16.8.2 697039 6104734 697080 6104645 100 0 0 0 3 0 23 51 14 0 15.91 The Pinnacle 16 1 TP_16.1.1 685070 6095816 685008 6095894 100 2 0 5 19 22 0 13 33 6 75.00 TP_16.1.2 685027 6095927 684926 6095932 100 0 0 3 12 16 0 1 57 11 98.55 2 TP_16.2.1 685189 6095981 685155 6095886 100 0 0 0 3 58 12 1 22 4 66.67 TP_16.2.2 684994 6096088 685056 6096012 100 1 0 5 2 39 9 12 27 5 60.38 TP_16.2.3 685166 6096107 685141 6096203 100 0 0 11 3 29 0 13 44 0 77.19 4 TP_16.4.1 685131 6095740 685059 6095672 100 4 0 8 2 13 0 13 59 1 82.19 5 TP_16.5.1 685040 6096150 684941 6096135 100 0 0 0 0 39 1 19 39 2 67.21 25 1 TP_25.1.1 685102 6095780 685005 6095782 100 1 2 7 29 2 0 4 35 20 93.22 Watson Woodland 16 2 WW_16.2.1 696889 6098868 696932 6098779 100 0 1 0 32 11 9 10 34 4 66.67 WW_16.2.2 696995 6098754 697075 6098814 100 0 0 0 9 50 0 11 29 0 72.50 WW_16.2.
3 696987 6098677 697085 6098662 100 0 0 0 22 15 9 15 34 8 63.64 6 WW_16.6.1 696831 6098671 696912 6098724 100 0 0 0 18 40 25 4 9 0 23.68 WW_16.6.2 697052 6098459 696952 6098426 100 0 2 0 27 17 33 15 9 0 15.79.
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 146 Appendix 3. PCS Excel Spreadsheets (excel files in separate .zip folder).
© Capital Ecology Pty Ltd 2018 147 Appendix 4. GIS Data (shapefiles in separate .zip folder).
Aeavital ecology.
Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Australian Capital Territory Nature Conservation Act 2014 A2014-59 Republication No 25 Effective: 23 June 2021 Republication date: 23 June 2021 Last amendment made by A2021-12.
Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au About this republication The republished law This is a republication of the Nature Conservation Act 2014 (including any amendment made under the Legislation Act 2001, part 11.3 (Editorial changes)) as in force on 23 June 2021. It also includes any commencement, amendment, repeal or expiry affecting this republished law to 23 June 2021. The legislation history and amendment history of the republished law are set out in endnotes 3 and 4. Kinds of republications The Parliamentary Counsel’s Office prepares 2 kinds of republications of ACT laws (see the ACT legislation register at www.legislation.act.gov.au): • authorised republications to which the Legislation Act 2001 applies • unauthorised republications. The status of this republication appears on the bottom of each page. Editorial changes The Legislation Act 2001, part 11.3 authorises the Parliamentary Counsel to make editorial amendments and other changes of a formal nature when preparing a law for republication. Editorial changes do not change the effect of the law, but have effect as if they had been made by an Act commencing on the republication date (see Legislation Act 2001, s 115 and s 117). The changes are made if the Parliamentary Counsel considers they are desirable to bring the law into line, or more closely into line, with current legislative drafting practice. This republication includes amendments made under part 11.3 (see endnote 1). Uncommenced provisions and amendments If a provision of the republished law has not commenced, the symbol U appears immediately before the provision heading. Any uncommenced amendments that affect this republished law are accessible on the ACT legislation register (www.legislation.act.gov.au). For more information, see the home page for this law on the register. Modifications If a provision of the republished law is affected by a current modification, the symbol M appears immediately before the provision heading. The text of the modifying provision appears in the endnotes. For the legal status of modifications, see the Legislation Act 2001, section 95. Penalties At the republication date, the value of a penalty unit for an offence against this law is $160 for an individual and $810 for a corporation (see Legislation Act 2001, s 133)..
R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 1 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Australian Capital Territory Nature Conservation Act 2014 Contents Page Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.1 Introduction 1 Name of Act 2 3 Dictionary 2 4 Notes 2 5 Offences against Act—application of Criminal Code etc 3 6 Objects of Act 3 Part 1.2 Relationship to other laws 7 Application of Act to Emergencies Act 2004 6 8 Relationship to environment laws 7.
Contents Page contents 2 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 1.3 Important concepts 9 What is nature? 8 10 What is conservation? 8 11 What is an animal? 8 12 What is a native animal? 9 13 What is a plant? 9 14 What is a native plant? 10 15 What is a species? 10 16 What is a native species? 11 17 What is an ecological community? 12 18 What is a member of a species or ecological community? 12 19 What is biodiversity? 13 Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.1 Conservator of flora and fauna 20 Conservator—appointment 14 21 Conservator—functions 14 22 Conservator—delegation 16 23 Conservator—guidelines 16 24 Meaning of biodiversity research and monitoring program—pt 2.1 17 25 Biodiversity research and monitoring program—conservator to prepare 17 26 Biodiversity research and monitoring program—conservator to implement 18 Part 2.2 ACT parks and conservation service 27 ACT parks and conservation service—establishment 19 Part 2.3 Conservation officers 28 Conservation officers—appointment 20 29 Conservation officers—identity cards 20 30 Conservation officers—power not to be exercised before identity card shown 21.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 3 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 2.4 Scientific committee 31 Scientific committee—establishment 22 32 Scientific committee—functions 22 33 Scientific committee—annual report 22 34 Scientific committee—Minister’s directions 22 35 Scientific committee—membership 23 36 Scientific committee—appointment of members 23 37 Scientific committee—chair and deputy chair 24 38 Scientific committee—secretary 24 39 Scientific committee—ending appointments 24 40 Scientific committee—disclosure of interests 25 41 Scientific committee—meetings 27 42 Scientific committee—presiding member at meetings 27 43 Scientific committee—quorum at meetings 27 44 Scientific committee—voting at meetings 27 45 Scientific committee—conduct of meetings 28 Part 2.5 Advisory committees 46 Advisory committees 29 Chapter 3 Nature conservation strategy for the ACT 47 What is the nature conservation strategy for the ACT? 30 48 What is a draft nature conservation strategy?—ch 3 30 49 Draft nature conservation strategy—conservator to prepare 31 50 Draft nature conservation strategy—consultation with entities 31 51 Draft nature conservation strategy—public consultation 32 52 Draft strategy—revision and submission to Minister 33 53 Draft strategy—Minister to approve, return or reject 33 54 Draft strategy—Minister’s approval and notification 34 55 Draft strategy—Minister’s direction to revise etc 34 56 Draft strategy—Minister’s rejection 34 57 Nature conservation strategy—minor amendments 35 58 Nature conservation strategy—conservator to implement 36.
Contents Page contents 4 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 59 Nature conservation strategy—monitoring 36 60 Nature conservation strategy—review 36 Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.1 Threatened native species 61 What is a threatened native species? 38 62 What is a threatened native species list? 38 63 Threatened native species list—categories 38 64 Threatened native species list—eligibility for national categories 39 64A Threatened native species list—eligibility for regional categories 40 65 Threatened native species list—eligibility criteria 42 66 Threatened native species list—criteria to review 43 Part 4.2 Threatened ecological communities 67 What is a threatened ecological community? 44 68 What is a threatened ecological communities list? 44 69 Threatened ecological communities list—categories 44 70 Threatened ecological communities list—eligibility for categories 45 71 Threatened ecological communities list—eligibility criteria 46 72 Threatened ecological communities list criteria—review 47 Part 4.3 Key threatening processes 73 What is a threatening process? 48 74 What is a key threatening process? 48 75 What is a key threatening processes list? 48 76 Key threatening processes list 48 77 Key threatening processes list—eligibility 49 78 Key threatening processes list—eligibility criteria 49 79 Key threatening processes list criteria—review 50.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 5 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.1 Definitions—pt 4.4 80 Definitions—pt 4.4 52 Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list— general 81 Nominations—public may nominate item at any time 54 82 Nominations—scientific committee may reject nomination 55 83 Nominations—scientific committee may nominate items itself 55 84 Nominations—public consultation 56 85 Nominations—scientific committee to carry out listing assessment 57 87 Minister to decide whether to include, transfer or omit item 59 88 Minister’s decision—include item 60 89 Minister’s decision—transfer item 61 90 Minister’s decision—omit item 61 Division 4.4.3 Including or transferring certain nationally threatened items 90A Minister may include or transfer nationally threatened items without nomination 63 Division 4.4.4 Conservation advice 90B Conservation advice guidelines 64 90C Conservation advice 64 90E Conservation advice—adopting advice for nationally threatened item 65 90F Conservation advice—scientific committee to review 66 Division 4.4.5 Final version of list and notification 91 Final version of list and notification 66 Division 4.4.6 Minor amendments of list 93 What is a minor amendment?—div 4.4.6 67 94 Minister may make minor amendments 68 95 Minor amendment—including similar species 68 96 Minor amendment—omitting similar species 69 97 Minor amendment—rediscovery of extinct species 69.
Contents Page contents 6 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 4.5 Action plans 98 Definitions—Act 70 99 What is an action plan?—pt 4.5 71 100 What is a draft action plan?—pt 4.5 71 100A Minister to decide if action plan needed 73 101 Draft action plan—conservator to prepare 74 102 Draft action plan—consultation with scientific committee 74 103 Draft action plan—public consultation 75 104 Draft action plan—revision 76 105 Draft action plan—final version and notification 76 106 Action plan—minor amendments 76 107 Action plan—conservator to implement 77 108 Action plan—monitoring and review 78 108A Action plan—ending action plan after review 79 Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.1 Special protection status 109 What is special protection status? 80 Part 5.2 Protected native species 110 What is a protected native species? 81 111 Minister to make protected native species list 81 112 Protected native species list—eligibility 82 113 Minister to develop criteria and processes for protected native species list 82 114 Protected native species list criteria—review 83 Part 5.3 Native species conservation plans 115 What is a native species conservation plan? 85 116 What is a draft native species conservation plan?—pt 5.3 85 117 Draft native species conservation plan—conservator to prepare 86.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 7 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 118 Draft native species conservation plan—consultation with scientific committee 86 119 Draft native species conservation plan—consultation with lessee and custodian 87 120 Draft native species conservation plan—public consultation 87 121 Draft native species conservation plan—revision 88 122 Draft native species conservation plan—final version and notification 89 123 Native species conservation plan—minor amendments 89 124 Native species conservation plan—conservator etc to implement 90 125 Native species conservation plan—monitoring and review 90 Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.1 Definitions—pt 6.1 126 Definitions—pt 6.1 92 Division 6.1.2 Native animals 127 Definitions—div 6.1.2 93 128 Offence—interfere with nest of native animal 93 129 Offence—interfere with nest of native animal—endanger progeny or breeding 94 130 Offence—kill native animal 96 131 Offence—injure or endanger native animal 97 132 Offence—take native animal 99 133 Offence—keep non-exempt animal 100 134 Offence—sell non-exempt animal 101 135 Offence—offer to sell animal without disclosing licence 102 136 Offence—import non-exempt animal 103 137 Offence—export non-exempt animal 103 138 Offence—release animal from captivity 104 Division 6.1.3 Native plants 139 Definitions—div 6.1.3 105 140 Offence—take native plant—unleased land 106.
Contents Page contents 8 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 141 Offence—take and sell native plant—unleased land 107 142 Offence—take native plant—protected native species 108 143 Offence—take native plant—special protection status 109 144 Offence—damage native tree—unleased land 110 145 Offence—damage native tree—leased land 111 146 Offence—damage or take fallen native timber 112 147 Offence—offer to sell native plant without disclosing licence 113 148 Offence—sell native plant—protected or special protection status 114 149 Offence—sell native plant without plant tag—protected or special protection status 115 150 Offence—import native plant—protected or special protection status 116 151 Offence—export native plant—protected or special protection status 117 152 Offence—export plant without plant tag—protected or special protection status 117 Division 6.1.4 Exceptions to offences 153 Chapter 6 exceptions 119 Part 6.2 Other matters 154 What is an exempt animal? 121 155 Declarations—exempt animals 121 156 Interest in native animal ends with escape 121 Chapter 7 Controlled native species management plans 157 What is a controlled native species?—ch 7 122 158 What is a controlled native species management plan? 122 159 What is a draft controlled native species management plan?—ch 7 123 160 Draft controlled native species management plan—conservator to prepare 124 161 Draft controlled native species management plan—consultation with lessee and custodian 124 162 Draft controlled native species management plan—public consultation 124 163 Draft controlled native species management plan—revision 126 164 Draft controlled native species management plan—emergencies 126.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 9 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 165 Draft controlled native species management plan—final version and notification 127 166 Controlled native species management plan—minor amendments 127 167 Controlled native species management plan—conservator etc to implement 128 168 Controlled native species management plan—monitoring and review 129 Chapter 7A Cultural resource management plan 168A Meaning of cultural resource management plan 130 168B Preparation of draft cultural resource management plan 130 168C Draft cultural resource management plan—revision and submission to Minister 131 168D Draft cultural resource management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject 131 168E Draft cultural resource management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc 132 168F Cultural resource management plan—minor amendments 132 168G Cultural resource management plan—conservator to implement 133 168H Cultural resource management plan—reporting 134 168I Cultural resource management plan—review 134 Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.1 Definitions 169 What is a reserve?—Act 135 170 What is a wilderness area?—Act 136 Part 8.2 IUCN categories for reserves 171 What is an IUCN category for a reserve?—pt 8.2 137 172 Assignment of reserves to IUCN categories 137 173 IUCN reserve management objectives 138 174 Management of reserve assigned to IUCN category if no reserve management plan 138.
Contents Page contents 10 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 8.3 Reserve management plans 175 What is a reserve management plan? 139 176 What is a draft reserve management plan?—pt 8.3 139 177 Draft reserve management plan—custodian to prepare 140 179 Draft reserve management plan—public consultation 140 180 Draft reserve management plan—revision and submission to Minister 141 181 Draft reserve management plan—referral to Legislative Assembly committee 142 182 Draft reserve management plan—committee to report 143 183 Draft reserve management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject 143 184 Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s approval and notification 145 185 Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc 145 186 Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s rejection 145 187 Reserve management plan—minor amendments 146 188 Reserve management plan—custodian to implement 147 189 Reserve management plan—review 147 Part 8.4 Ramsar wetlands management plans 190 What is a Ramsar wetland? 148 191 What is a Ramsar wetland management plan? 148 192 What is a draft Ramsar wetland management plan?—pt 8.4 148 193 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—conservator to prepare 149 194 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—consultation with Commonwealth and custodian 149 195 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—public consultation 150 196 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—revision and submission to Minister 151 197 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject 151 198 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s approval and notification 152 199 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc 152 200 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s rejection 153.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 11 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 201 Ramsar wetland management plan—minor amendments 153 202 Ramsar wetland management plan—conservator etc to implement 154 203 Ramsar wetland management plan—monitoring and review 154 Part 8.5 Access to biological resources in reserves 204 What are biological resources?—pt 8.5 155 205 What are genetic resources?—pt 8.5 155 206 Who is an access provider?—pt 8.5 155 207 What is accessing biological resources?—pt 8.5 156 208 Application—certain biological resources 157 209 Offence—access biological resources 158 210 Benefit-sharing agreement—licensee required to enter 159 211 Benefit-sharing agreement—provisions 159 212 Benefit-sharing agreement—informed consent 160 Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.1 Reserves—offences generally 213 Offence—enter reserve without paying entry fee 161 214 Offence—take animal into reserve 161 215 Offence—feed native animal in reserve 162 216 Offence—interfere with trap or bait in reserve 162 217 Offence—weapons and traps in reserve 163 218 Offence—damage native plant in reserve 164 219 Offence—take plant or plant reproductive material into reserve 164 220 Offence—planting a plant in a reserve 165 221 Offence—remove soil or stone from reserve 165 222 Offence—damage, destroy or remove things in reserve 165 Part 9.2 Reserves—offences in wilderness areas 223 Offence—make road in wilderness area 168 224 Offence—use motor vehicle off road in wilderness area 168 225 Offence—excavate in wilderness area without licence 168 226 Direction to restore excavation site 169.
Contents Page contents 12 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 227 Offence—fail to comply with restore excavation direction 170 228 Restoration of excavation site by Territory 170 Part 9.3 Reserves—repairing damage 229 Directions to repair damage to reserve 171 230 Offence—fail to comply with repair damage direction 172 231 Repair of damage by Territory 172 Part 9.4 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation 232 What is native vegetation?—pt 9.4 173 233 What is a native vegetation area?—pt 9.4 173 234 What is clearing native vegetation?—pt 9.4 174 235 When does clearing native vegetation cause serious harm or material harm to a reserve?—pt 9.4 174 236 Offence—clear vegetation causing serious harm 175 237 Offence—clear vegetation causing material harm 177 238 Offence—clear vegetation 178 239 Defence of appropriate diligence for offences—pt 9.4 179 240 Alternative verdicts for offences—pt 9.4 179 241 Order to restore cleared vegetation etc 180 242 Order to publicise conviction or finding of guilt—pt 9.4 181 Part 9.5 Reserves—offences about damaging land 243 What is damage to land?—pt 9.5 182 244 When does damage to land cause serious harm or material harm to a reserve?—pt 9.5 182 245 Offence—damage land causing serious harm 183 246 Offence—damage land causing material harm 185 247 Offence—damage land causing harm 186 248 Defence of appropriate diligence for offences—pt 9.5 187 249 Alternative verdicts for offences—pt 9.5 187 250 Order to rehabilitate land etc 188 251 Order to publicise conviction or finding of guilt—pt 9.5 189.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 13 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 9.6 Exceptions to offences 252 Chapter 9 exceptions 190 Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.1 Resource protection areas 253 What is a resource protection area?—ch 10 192 254 Resource protection area—declaration 192 255 Resource protection area—review 194 Part 10.2 Prohibited and restricted activities 256 Conservator may make activities declarations 195 257 Offence—carry on restricted activity in reserve 196 258 Offence—carry on prohibited activity in reserve 197 259 Conservator may close reserve 198 260 Offence—enter closed reserve 199 261 Part 10.2 exceptions 199 Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.1 Licences—preliminary 262 What is a nature conservation licence? 201 262A Who is an influential person for a corporation?—ch 11 201 263 Offence—fail to comply with condition of licence 202 Part 11.2 Licences—application and suitability 264 Licence—application 203 265 Who is a suitable person to hold a licence?—ch 11 204 266 What is suitability information about a person?—ch 11 204 267 Suitability of people—further information about people 205 268 What is a suitable activity for a licence? 206 269 What is suitability information about an activity? 208 270 Suitability of activities—further information about activity 208.
Contents Page contents 14 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 271 Suitability of activities—risk management plan 209 272 Suitability of activities—inspection of place 209 Part 11.3 Licences—decision 273 Licence—decision on application 211 274 Licence—conditions generally 212 275 Licence—conditions about native species conservation plans etc 212 276 Licence—term 213 277 Licence—form 213 Part 11.4 Licences—financial assurance conditions 278 What is a financial assurance condition? 214 279 Financial assurance condition—imposition 214 280 Financial assurance condition—show cause 215 281 Financial assurance condition—licence cancellation 216 282 Financial assurance condition—claim or realisation 216 283 Financial assurance condition—notice before claim or realisation 217 284 Financial assurance condition—recovery of extra costs 218 285 Financial assurance condition—money held by Territory 219 Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal 286 Licence—amendment initiated by conservator 220 287 Licence—application to amend licence 221 288 Licence—decision on application to amend licence 221 289 Licence—application to transfer licence 223 290 Licence—decision on application to transfer licence 223 291 Licence—application for renewal of licence 224 292 Licence—decision on application for renewal of licence 225 293 Licence—replacing when lost, stolen or destroyed 226 294 Licence—surrender 227 295 Offence—fail to notify change of name or address 227 296 Licence—conservator to change name and address 228.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 15 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.6 Licences—regulatory action 297 Licence—grounds for regulatory action 229 298 Licence—regulatory action 229 299 Licence—taking regulatory action 230 300 Licence—immediate suspension 231 301 Licence—effect of suspension 232 302 Offence—fail to return amended, suspended or cancelled licences 232 303 Action by conservator in relation to amended or suspended licence 233 Part 11.7 Licence—register, records and royalties 304 Licence register 234 305 Licence register—correction and keeping up to date 234 306 Offence—fail to keep records 235 307 Royalty 236 Chapter 12 Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others 308 What are agencies and activities of agencies?—ch 12 237 309 What are management objectives?—ch 12 238 310 What is a management agreement?—ch 12 239 311 Management agreement—conservator may propose 240 312 Management agreement—agency may enter or refuse 241 313 Management agreement—refusal and repairing damage 241 314 Management agreement—breach of agreement and repairing damage 242 Chapter 13 Land development applications 315 Meaning of development—ch 13 243 316 Simplified outline 243 317 Advice about adverse environmental impacts 244 318 Requirements for conservator’s advice 244.
Contents Page contents 16 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 13A Minor public works in reserves 318A Minor public works code 247 Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions 319 Direction to give name and address 249 320 Offence—fail to comply with direction to give name and address 250 321 Direction to produce licence or records 251 322 Offence—fail to comply with direction to produce licence or record 252 323 Direction to provide information 252 324 Offence—fail to comply with information direction 253 325 Direction to leave reserve 253 326 Offence—fail to comply with direction to leave reserve 254 327 Direction to stop vehicle containing animal or plant 255 328 Offence—fail to comply with stop vehicle direction 256 329 Urgent directions 256 330 Offence—fail to comply with urgent direction 258 331 Conservator’s directions 258 332 Offence—fail to comply with conservator’s direction 260 333 Treatment directions 261 334 Offence—fail to comply with treatment direction 262 335 Treatment of animal or plant by Territory 262 336 Injunctions to restrain contravention of urgent directions and conservator’s directions 263 Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.1 Definitions—pt 14.2 337 Definitions—pt 14.2 265 Division 14.2.2 Powers of conservation officers 338 Power to enter premises 266 339 Production of identity card 267 340 Consent to entry 267.
Contents Page R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 contents 17 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 341 General powers on entry to premises 268 342 Power to seize things 269 343 Seizure and release of distressed native birds 270 344 Release of distressed animals—court orders 272 Division 14.2.3 Search warrants 345 Warrants generally 273 346 Warrants—application made other than in person 274 347 Search warrants—announcement before entry 275 348 Details of search warrant to be given to occupier etc 276 349 Occupier entitled to be present during search etc 276 Division 14.2.4 Return and forfeiture of things seized 350 Receipt for things seized 277 351 Moving things to another place for examination or processing under search warrant 277 352 Access to things seized 278 353 Return of things seized 279 354 Forfeiture of things seized 279 355 Power to destroy unsafe things 280 356 Application for order disallowing seizure 281 357 Order for return of things seized 282 Division 14.2.5 Enforcement—damage and compensation 358 Damage etc to be minimised 283 359 Compensation for exercise of enforcement powers 284 Chapter 15 Notification and review of decisions 360 Meaning of reviewable decision—ch 15 285 361 Reviewable decision notices 285 362 Applications for review 285 Chapter 16 Miscellaneous 363 Certain information may be kept confidential 286 364 Offences—use or divulge protected information 286.
Contents Page contents 18 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 365 Acts and omissions of representatives 288 366 Criminal liability of executive officers 289 367 Evidentiary certificates 291 368 Determination of fees etc 291 370 Regulation-making power 292 371 Review of Act 292 Schedule 1 Reviewable decisions 293 Dictionary 295 Endnotes 1 About the endnotes 310 2 Abbreviation key 310 3 Legislation history 311 4 Amendment history 315 5 Earlier republications 325 6 Expired transitional or validating provisions 327.
R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 1 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Australian Capital Territory Nature Conservation Act 2014 An Act to make provision for the protection, conservation, enhancement and management of nature in the ACT, for the management of reserves, and for other purposes.
Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.1 Introduction Section 1 page 2 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.1 Introduction 1 Name of Act This Act is the Nature Conservation Act 2014. 3 Dictionary The dictionary at the end of this Act is part of this Act. Note 1 The dictionary at the end of this Act defines certain terms used in this Act, and includes references (signpost definitions) to other terms defined elsewhere. For example, the signpost definition ‘motor vehicle—see the Road Transport (General) Act 1999, dictionary.’ means that the term ‘motor vehicle’ is defined in that dictionary and the definition applies to this Act. Note 2 A definition in the dictionary (including a signpost definition) applies to the entire Act unless the definition, or another provision of the Act, provides otherwise or the contrary intention otherwise appears (see Legislation Act, s 155 and s 156 (1)). 4 Notes A note included in this Act is explanatory and is not part of this Act. Note See the Legislation Act, s 127 (1), (4) and (5) for the legal status of notes..
Preliminary Chapter 1 Introduction Part 1.1 Section 5 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 3 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 5 Offences against Act—application of Criminal Code etc Other legislation applies in relation to offences against this Act. Note 1 Criminal Code The Criminal Code, ch 2 applies to all offences against this Act (see Code, pt 2.1). The chapter sets out the general principles of criminal responsibility (including burdens of proof and general defences), and defines terms used for offences to which the Code applies (eg conduct, intention, recklessness and strict liability). Note 2 Penalty units The Legislation Act, s 133 deals with the meaning of offence penalties that are expressed in penalty units. 6 Objects of Act (1) The main object of this Act is to protect, conserve and enhance the biodiversity of the ACT. (2) This is to be achieved particularly by— (a) protecting, conserving, enhancing, restoring and improving nature conservation, including— (i) native species of animals and plants and their habitats; and (ii) ecological communities; and (iii) biological diversity at the community, species and genetic levels; and (iv) ecosystems, and ecosystem processes and functions; and Examples—processes and functions 1 decomposition and production of plant matter 2 energy and nutrient exchanges (v) ecological connectivity; and Example—connectivity the movement of organisms from one place to another.
Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.1 Introduction Section 6 page 4 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (vi) landforms of natural significance, including geological and geomorphological features and processes; and (vii) landscapes of natural significance; and (b) promoting and supporting the management, maintenance and enhancement of biodiversity of local, regional and national significance; and (c) promoting the involvement of, and cooperation between, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, landholders, other community members and governments in conserving, protecting, enhancing, restoring and improving biodiversity; and (d) encouraging public appreciation, understanding and enjoyment of biodiversity; and (e) recognising and promoting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ role in, and knowledge of, the conservation and ecologically sustainable use of biodiversity; and (f) recognising the significant stewardship role that landholders have in managing the natural assets on their land; and (g) ensuring that members of the public have— (i) access to reliable and relevant information in appropriate forms to facilitate a good understanding of nature conservation issues; and (ii) opportunities to participate in policy development, nature conservation planning and conservation work; and Example ACT ParkCare (h) promoting the principles of ecologically sustainable development..
Preliminary Chapter 1 Introduction Part 1.1 Section 6 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 5 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) In exercising a function under this Act, the Minister must have regard to the objects of this Act. (4) In this section: ecologically sustainable development means the effective integration of economic and environmental considerations in decision-making processes achievable through implementation of the following: (a) the precautionary principle; (b) the inter-generational equity principle; (c) conservation of biological diversity and ecological integrity; (d) improved valuation and pricing of environmental resources. inter-generational equity principle means that the present generation should ensure that the health, diversity and productivity of the environment is maintained or enhanced for the benefit of future generations. precautionary principle means that, if there is a threat of serious or irreversible environmental damage, a lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation..
Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.2 Relationship to other laws Section 7 page 6 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 1.2 Relationship to other laws 7 Application of Act to Emergencies Act 2004 (1) This Act does not apply to the exercise or purported exercise by a relevant person of a function under the Emergencies Act 2004 for the purpose of— (a) protecting life or property; or (b) controlling, extinguishing or preventing the spread of a fire. (2) In this section: emergency controller—see the Emergencies Act 2004, dictionary. relevant person means— (a) an emergency controller; or (b) a member of the ambulance service; or (c) a member of the fire and rescue service; or (d) a member of the rural fire service; or (e) a member of the SES; or (f) any other person under the control of— (i) an emergency controller; or (ii) the chief officer (ambulance service); or (iii) the chief officer (fire and rescue service); or (iv) the chief officer (rural fire service); or (v) the chief officer (SES); or (g) a police officer..
Preliminary Chapter 1 Relationship to other laws Part 1.2 Section 8 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 7 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 8 Relationship to environment laws (1) This Act must be construed and administered in a way that is consistent with an environment law unless the contrary intention appears from this Act or that law. (2) This Act is taken to be consistent with an environment law to the extent that it is capable of operating concurrently with that law. (3) In this section: environment law means— (a) the Environment Protection Act 1997; and (b) the Fisheries Act 2000; and (c) the Water Resources Act 2007; and (d) any other law of the Territory that has as 1 of its objects or purposes the protection of the environment..
Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.3 Important concepts Section 9 page 8 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 1.3 Important concepts 9 What is nature? In this Act: nature means all aspects of nature including— (a) ecosystems and their constituent parts; and (b) all natural and physical resources; and (c) natural dynamic processes; and (d) the characteristics of places, however large or small, that contribute to their— (i) biological diversity and integrity; or (ii) intrinsic or scientific value. 10 What is conservation? In this Act: conservation means the protection and maintenance of nature while allowing for its ecologically sustainable use. 11 What is an animal? In this Act: animal— (a) means a member, alive or dead, of the animal kingdom; and (b) includes— (i) a part of an animal; and Examples skin, feathers, horns, shell, egg yolk.
Preliminary Chapter 1 Important concepts Part 1.3 Section 12 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 9 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) animal reproductive material; but (c) does not include— (i) a human; or (ii) a fish unless the fish— (A) has special protection status; or Note Special protection status—see s 109. (B) is a protected native species; or Note Protected native species—see s 110. (iii) an invertebrate unless the invertebrate— (A) has special protection status; or (B) is a protected native species. 12 What is a native animal? In this Act: native animal— (a) means an animal of a native species; but (b) does not include a pest animal. Note Pest animal—see the Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005, dictionary. 13 What is a plant? In this Act: plant— (a) means a member, alive or dead, of the— (i) plant kingdom; or.
Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.3 Important concepts Section 14 page 10 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) fungus kingdom; and (b) includes— (i) a part of a plant; and (ii) plant reproductive material. 14 What is a native plant? In this Act: native plant— (a) means a plant of a native species; but (b) does not include a pest plant. Note Pest plant—see the Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005, dictionary. 15 What is a species? (1) In this Act: species— (a) means a group of biological entities that— (i) interbreed to produce fertile offspring; or (ii) possess common characteristics derived from a common gene pool; and (b) includes— (i) a subspecies; and (ii) a variety; and (iii) a distinct population of biological entities prescribed by regulation to be a species..
Preliminary Chapter 1 Important concepts Part 1.3 Section 16 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 11 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) In this section: subspecies means a geographically separate population of a species, being a population that is characterised by morphological or biological differences from other populations of that species. 16 What is a native species? In this Act: native species— (a) means a species— (i) that is indigenous to— (A) Australia or an external Territory; or (B) the coastal sea of Australia or an external Territory; or (C) the seabed of the coastal sea of Australia or an external Territory; or (D) the continental shelf; or (E) the exclusive economic zone; or (ii) members of which periodically or occasionally visit— (A) Australia or an external Territory; or (B) the coastal sea of Australia or an external Territory; or (C) the exclusive economic zone; or (iii) that was present in Australia or an external Territory before 1400; and (b) includes a species prescribed by regulation to be a native species; but.
Chapter 1 Preliminary Part 1.3 Important concepts Section 17 page 12 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) does not include a species prescribed by regulation to not be a native species. Note Coastal sea—see the dictionary. Continental shelf—see the dictionary. Exclusive economic zone—see the dictionary. Seabed—see the dictionary. 17 What is an ecological community? In this Act: ecological community means the extent in nature in the ACT of an assemblage of native species that— (a) inhabits a particular area in nature; and (b) satisfies the criteria prescribed by regulation (if any). 18 What is a member of a species or ecological community? In this Act: member includes— (a) for a species of animal— (i) any part of an animal of the species; and (ii) any animal reproductive material of an animal of the species, or any part of that reproductive material; and (iii) the whole or any part of the dead body of an animal of the species; and (b) for a species of plant— (i) any part of a plant of the species; and (ii) any plant reproductive material of a plant of the species, or any part of that reproductive material; and.
Preliminary Chapter 1 Important concepts Part 1.3 Section 19 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 13 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (iii) the whole or any part of a plant of the species that has died; and (c) for an ecological community— (i) any part of an animal or plant of the community; and (ii) any animal reproductive material of an animal, or plant reproductive material of a plant, of the community, or any part of that animal reproductive material or plant reproductive material; and (iii) the whole or any part of an animal or plant of the community that has died. 19 What is biodiversity? In this Act: biodiversity— (a) means the variability among living organisms from all sources (including terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part); and (b) includes diversity— (i) within species and between species; and (ii) of ecosystems..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.1 Conservator of flora and fauna Section 20 page 14 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.1 Conservator of flora and fauna 20 Conservator—appointment (1) The director-general must appoint a public servant as the Conservator of Flora and Fauna (the conservator). Note 1 For the making of appointments (including acting appointments), see the Legislation Act, pt 19.3. Note 2 In particular, a person may be appointed for a particular provision of a law (see Legislation Act, s 7 (3)) and an appointment may be made by naming a person or nominating the occupant of a position (see Legislation Act, s 207). (2) However, the director-general may appoint a person as the conservator only if satisfied that the person has suitable qualifications and experience to exercise the functions of the conservator. (3) An appointment is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. 21 Conservator—functions (1) The conservator’s main functions are— (a) to develop and oversee policies, programs and plans for the effective management of nature conservation in the ACT; and (b) to monitor the state of nature conservation in the ACT; and (c) to provide information to the commissioner for sustainability and the environment for inclusion in a state of the environment report. Note State of the environment report—see s (5). (2) The conservator has any other function given to the conservator under this Act or another territory law..
Administration Chapter 2 Conservator of flora and fauna Part 2.1 Section 21 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 15 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) In exercising a function, the conservator must ensure that it is exercised in a way that is consistent with implementing— (a) the objects of this Act; and Note The objects of this Act are set out in s 6. (b) any conservator guidelines; and Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23. (c) the nature conservation strategy for the ACT. Note Nature conservation strategy, for the ACT—see s 47. (4) In exercising a function, the conservator may have regard to any other relevant matter, including the following: (a) the findings of a biodiversity research and monitoring program; Note Biodiversity research and monitoring program—see s 24. (b) an action plan for a species, ecological community or process; Note Action plan—see s 99. (c) a reserve management plan for a reserve; Note Reserve management plan, for a reserve—see s 175. (d) any response of the government to— (i) a state of the environment report under the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993, section 19 (3) (State of the environment report); or (ii) a special report under the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993, section 21 (2) (Special reports);.
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.1 Conservator of flora and fauna Section 22 page 16 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (e) any other government policy or plan relating to nature conservation. Example kangaroo management plan (5) In this section: state of the environment report means a state of the environment report under the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993. 22 Conservator—delegation The conservator may delegate to a conservation officer the conservator’s functions under this Act or another territory law. Note For the making of delegations and the exercise of delegated functions, see the Legislation Act, pt 19.4. 23 Conservator—guidelines (1) The conservator may make guidelines about how the conservator is to exercise the conservator’s functions under this Act (the conservator guidelines). Note The power to make guidelines includes the power to amend or repeal the guidelines. The power to amend or repeal the guidelines is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the guidelines (see Legislation Act, s 46). (2) In preparing the conservator guidelines, the conservator must consult the scientific committee. (3) A conservator guideline is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Administration Chapter 2 Conservator of flora and fauna Part 2.1 Section 24 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 17 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 24 Meaning of biodiversity research and monitoring program—pt 2.1 In this part: biodiversity research and monitoring program means a program designed to monitor the— (a) state of nature conservation generally in the ACT; and (b) effective management of nature conservation in the ACT. 25 Biodiversity research and monitoring program— conservator to prepare (1) The conservator must, every 2 years, prepare a biodiversity research and monitoring program for the next 2 years. (2) In preparing the biodiversity research and monitoring program, the conservator must— (a) consult the scientific committee about— (i) priorities for the program; and (ii) appropriate methods for monitoring; and (b) consider the potential for engaging community organisations in monitoring activities; and Example using volunteers with Frogwatch to assist in surveying frog numbers (c) consider arrangements for sharing and transferring monitoring data with other entities. (3) The biodiversity research and monitoring program is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.1 Conservator of flora and fauna Section 26 page 18 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 26 Biodiversity research and monitoring program— conservator to implement (1) The conservator— (a) must take reasonable steps to implement the biodiversity research and monitoring program; and (b) may commission another entity to implement all or part of the program. (2) The conservator must at the end of each biodiversity research and monitoring program— (a) prepare a report on the implementation of the program (a biodiversity research and monitoring program report); and (b) make the report publicly accessible as soon as possible, but not later than 3 months, after the end of the program. Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website (3) However, if the conservator considers that a plant or animal could be threatened by the disclosure of a particular detail in a finding, the conservator— (a) need not include the particular detail; but (b) must instead include a general statement of the finding..
Administration Chapter 2 ACT parks and conservation service Part 2.2 Section 27 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 19 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 2.2 ACT parks and conservation service 27 ACT parks and conservation service—establishment (1) The ACT Parks and Conservation Service is established. Note Establish includes continue in existence (see Legislation Act, dict, pt 1). (2) The ACT parks and conservation service is made up of the conservation officers. Note The conservator is a conservation officer. Other conservation officers are appointed by the director-general under s 28. (3) The ACT parks and conservation service must assist— (a) the conservator in the exercise of the conservator’s functions; and (b) for unleased land, or public land, that is a reserve—the custodian for the land in the exercise of the custodian’s functions. Note Custodian, for an area of land—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, s 333. (4) The ACT parks and conservation service has any other function given to the service under this Act or another territory law..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.3 Conservation officers Section 28 page 20 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 2.3 Conservation officers 28 Conservation officers—appointment (1) The director-general may appoint a person as a conservation officer. Note 1 For the making of appointments (including acting appointments), see the Legislation Act, pt 19.3. Note 2 In particular, a person may be appointed for a particular provision of a law (see Legislation Act, s 7 (3)) and an appointment may be made by naming a person or nominating the occupant of a position (see Legislation Act, s 207). (2) The conservator is a conservation officer. 29 Conservation officers—identity cards (1) The director-general must give a conservation officer an identity card stating the person’s name and that the person is a conservation officer. (2) The identity card must show— (a) a recent photograph of the conservation officer; and (b) the card’s date of issue and expiry; and (c) anything else prescribed by regulation. (3) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) stops being a conservation officer; and (b) does not return the person’s identity card to the director-general as soon as practicable (but not later than 7 days) after the day the person stops being a conservation officer. Maximum penalty: 1 penalty unit. (4) Subsection (3) does not apply to a person if the person’s identity card has been— (a) lost or stolen; or.
Administration Chapter 2 Conservation officers Part 2.3 Section 30 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) destroyed by someone else. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 30 Conservation officers—power not to be exercised before identity card shown A conservation officer may exercise a power under a territory law in relation to a person only if the conservation officer first shows the person the conservation officer’s identity card..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.4 Scientific committee Section 31 page 22 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 2.4 Scientific committee 31 Scientific committee—establishment The scientific committee is established. 32 Scientific committee—functions The scientific committee has the following functions: (a) to advise the Minister about nature conservation; (b) to advise the conservator about nature conservation; (c) to exercise any other function given to the committee under this Act or another territory law. Note A provision of a law that gives an entity (including a person) a function also gives the entity powers necessary and convenient to exercise the function (see Legislation Act, s 196 and dict, pt 1, def entity). 33 Scientific committee—annual report (1) The scientific committee must, each financial year, give the Minister a report (an annual report) about the activities of the committee during the year. (2) The scientific committee must make the annual report publicly accessible not later than 30 days after the day the scientific committee gives the report to the Minister. Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website 34 Scientific committee—Minister’s directions (1) The Minister may direct the scientific committee, in writing, to provide advice about a stated nature conservation matter. (2) The Minister must give a copy of each Minister’s direction to the conservator..
Administration Chapter 2 Scientific committee Part 2.4 Section 35 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 23 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A report prepared by the conservator under the Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004 for a financial year must include— (a) a copy of each Minister’s direction given during the year; and (b) a statement by the conservator about action taken during the year to give effect to any Minister’s direction (whether given before or during the year). 35 Scientific committee—membership The scientific committee is made up of 7 members appointed by the Minister under section 36. 36 Scientific committee—appointment of members (1) The Minister must appoint 7 members to the scientific committee. Note 1 For the making of appointments (including acting appointments), see the Legislation Act, pt 19.3. Note 2 In particular, a person may be appointed for a particular provision of a law (see Legislation Act, s 7 (3)) and an appointment may be made by naming a person or nominating the occupant of a position (see Legislation Act, s 207). Note 3 Certain Ministerial appointments require consultation with an Assembly committee and are disallowable (see Legislation Act, div 19.3.3). (2) The Minister must ensure that at least 4 members of the committee are not public servants. (3) The Minister must not appoint a person to the committee unless satisfied that the person has appropriate scientific expertise in biology, ecology, conservation science, or conservation management. (4) A member holds office as a part-time member. (5) The appointment of a member is for not longer than 3 years. Note A person may be reappointed to a position if the person is eligible to be appointed to the position (see Legislation Act, s 208 and dict, pt 1, def appoint)..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.4 Scientific committee Section 37 page 24 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (6) The conditions of appointment of a member under this section are the conditions stated in the appointment, subject to any determination under the Remuneration Tribunal Act 1995. (7) An appointment is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 37 Scientific committee—chair and deputy chair (1) The Minister must appoint a chair and deputy chair of the scientific committee from the members appointed under section 36. (2) However, the chair and deputy chair must not be public servants. 38 Scientific committee—secretary The director-general must nominate a public servant who is not a member appointed under section 36 to be the secretary of the scientific committee. 39 Scientific committee—ending appointments The Minister may end the appointment of a member— (a) for misbehaviour; or (b) if the member, without reasonable excuse, contravenes section 40; or (c) if the member is absent from 3 consecutive meetings of the scientific committee, other than on approved leave; or (d) for physical or mental incapacity, if the incapacity substantially affects the exercise of the member’s functions. Note A person’s appointment also ends if the person resigns (see Legislation Act, s 210)..
Administration Chapter 2 Scientific committee Part 2.4 Section 40 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 25 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 40 Scientific committee—disclosure of interests (1) If a member of the scientific committee has a material interest in an issue being considered, or about to be considered, by the committee, the member must disclose the nature of the interest at a committee meeting as soon as practicable after the relevant facts come to the member’s knowledge. Note Material interest is defined in s (4). The definition of indirect interest in s (4) applies to the definition of material interest. (2) The disclosure must be recorded in the committee’s minutes and, unless the committee otherwise decides, the member must not— (a) be present when the committee considers the issue; or (b) take part in a decision of the committee on the issue. (3) Any other committee member who also has a material interest in the issue must not be present when the committee is considering its decision under subsection (2). (4) In this section: associate, of a person, means— (a) the person’s business partner; or (b) a close friend of the person; or (c) a family member of the person. executive officer, of a corporation, means a person (however described) who is concerned with, or takes part in, the corporation’s management, whether or not the person is a director of the corporation..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.4 Scientific committee Section 40 page 26 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au indirect interest—without limiting the kinds of indirect interests a person may have, a person has an indirect interest in an issue if any of the following has an interest in the issue: (a) an associate of the person; (b) a corporation if the corporation has not more than 100 members and the person, or an associate of the person, is a member of the corporation; (c) a subsidiary of a corporation mentioned in paragraph (b); (d) a corporation if the person, or an associate of the person, is an executive officer of the corporation; (e) the trustee of a trust if the person, or an associate of the person, is a beneficiary of the trust; (f) a member of a firm or partnership if the person, or an associate of the person, is a member of the firm or partnership; (g) someone else carrying on a business if the person, or an associate of the person, has a direct or indirect right to participate in the profits of the business. material interest—a committee member has a material interest in an issue if the member has— (a) a direct or indirect financial interest in the issue; or (b) a direct or indirect interest of any other kind if the interest could conflict with the proper exercise of the member’s functions in relation to the committee’s consideration of the issue..
Administration Chapter 2 Scientific committee Part 2.4 Section 41 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 27 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 41 Scientific committee—meetings (1) Meetings of the scientific committee are to be held when and where it decides. (2) However, the chair must call a meeting— (a) as often as needed for the committee to efficiently carry out its functions; and (b) if asked by the Minister. (3) The chair must give the other members of the committee at least 5 working days written notice of a meeting. 42 Scientific committee—presiding member at meetings (1) The chair presides at all meetings at which the chair is present. (2) If the chair is absent, the deputy chair presides. (3) If the chair and the deputy chair are absent, the member chosen by the members present presides. 43 Scientific committee—quorum at meetings Business may be carried on at a meeting of the scientific committee only if at least 1/2 of the appointed members are present. 44 Scientific committee—voting at meetings (1) At a meeting of the scientific committee, each member has a vote on each question to be decided. (2) A question is decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting but, if the votes are equal, the member presiding has the deciding vote..
Chapter 2 Administration Part 2.4 Scientific committee Section 45 page 28 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 45 Scientific committee—conduct of meetings (1) The scientific committee may conduct its proceedings (including its meetings) as it considers appropriate. (2) The scientific committee must keep minutes of its meetings..
Administration Chapter 2 Advisory committees Part 2.5 Section 46 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 29 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 2.5 Advisory committees 46 Advisory committees (1) The Minister may set up advisory committees that the Minister considers necessary. (2) An advisory committee may decide how to exercise its functions. (3) However, an advisory committee is subject to the direction of the Minister in the exercise of its functions..
Chapter 3 Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Section 47 page 30 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 3 Nature conservation strategy for the ACT 47 What is the nature conservation strategy for the ACT? In this Act: nature conservation strategy, for the ACT, means a strategy for the ACT, notified under section 54 (Draft strategy—Minister’s approval and notification). Note The power to prepare a draft nature conservation strategy includes the power to amend or repeal the draft strategy. The power to amend or repeal the draft strategy is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the draft strategy (see Legislation Act, s 46). 48 What is a draft nature conservation strategy?—ch 3 In this chapter: draft nature conservation strategy, for the ACT— (a) means a statement of— (i) proposals about the protection, management and conservation of— (A) native species indigenous to the ACT; and (B) significant ecosystems of the ACT; and (ii) strategies to address actual and potential impacts of climate change; and (b) includes anything required to be included by a conservator guideline. Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23..
Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Chapter 3 Section 49 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 31 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 49 Draft nature conservation strategy—conservator to prepare (1) The conservator must prepare a draft nature conservation strategy for the ACT. Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48). (2) In preparing the draft nature conservation strategy, the conservator must consider— (a) landscape scale approaches across tenures; and (b) restoration of habitats; and (c) landscape connectivity; and (d) threats to biodiversity; and (e) the impacts of climate change; and (f) biodiversity research and monitoring program reports. 50 Draft nature conservation strategy—consultation with entities In preparing a draft nature conservation strategy for the ACT, the conservator must consult— (a) the scientific committee; and (b) the commissioner for sustainability and the environment..
Chapter 3 Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Section 51 page 32 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 51 Draft nature conservation strategy—public consultation (1) If the conservator prepares a draft nature conservation strategy, the conservator must also prepare a notice about the draft nature conservation strategy (a public consultation notice). (2) A public consultation notice must— (a) state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft nature conservation strategy; and (ii) submissions may be given to the conservator only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) include the draft nature conservation strategy. (3) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the conservator notifies a public consultation notice for a draft nature conservation strategy— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft strategy; and (b) the submission may be given to the conservator only during the public consultation period for the draft strategy; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (5) The conservator may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the draft strategy..
Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Chapter 3 Section 52 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 33 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 52 Draft strategy—revision and submission to Minister (1) If the public consultation period for a draft nature conservation strategy has ended, the conservator must— (a) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period; and (b) make any revisions to the draft strategy that the conservator considers appropriate. (2) The conservator must then submit the draft strategy to the Minister for approval. (3) The draft strategy must be accompanied by a report setting out the issues raised in any submissions given to the conservator during the public consultation period for the draft strategy. 53 Draft strategy—Minister to approve, return or reject If the conservator submits a draft nature conservation strategy to the Minister for approval, the Minister must— (a) approve the draft strategy; or (b) return the draft strategy to the conservator and direct the conservator to take 1 or more of the following actions in relation to it: (i) carry out stated further consultation; (ii) consider a relevant report; Example a report of the commissioner for sustainability and the environment under the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993 (iii) revise the draft strategy in a stated way; or (c) reject the draft strategy..
Chapter 3 Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Section 54 page 34 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 54 Draft strategy—Minister’s approval and notification (1) A draft nature conservation strategy approved by the Minister under section 53 (a) or section 57 (3) is a nature conservation strategy. (2) A nature conservation strategy is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a nature conservation strategy includes the power to amend or repeal the strategy. The power to amend or repeal the strategy is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the strategy (see Legislation Act, s 46). Note 3 Minor amendments may be made to the strategy under s 57. 55 Draft strategy—Minister’s direction to revise etc (1) This section applies if the Minister gives the conservator a direction under section 53 (b). (2) The conservator must— (a) give effect to the direction; and (b) resubmit the draft strategy to the Minister for approval. (3) The Minister must decide, under section 53, what to do with the resubmitted draft strategy. 56 Draft strategy—Minister’s rejection (1) If the Minister rejects a draft nature conservation strategy under section 53 (c), the Minister must prepare a notice stating that the draft strategy is rejected (a rejection notice). (2) A rejection notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Chapter 3 Section 57 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 35 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 57 Nature conservation strategy—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) a nature conservation strategy for the ACT is in force (the existing strategy); and (b) the conservator considers that minor amendments to the existing strategy are appropriate. (2) The conservator— (a) may prepare a new draft nature conservation strategy, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing strategy; and (b) need not comply with the requirements in this part; and (c) may submit the new draft nature conservation strategy to the Minister for approval. (3) If the conservator submits a new draft nature conservation strategy to the Minister for approval, the Minister must— (a) approve the strategy; or (b) reject the strategy. Note The new draft nature conservation strategy approved by the Minister is a nature conservation strategy and is a disallowable instrument (see s 54). (4) In this section: minor amendment, of a nature conservation strategy for the ACT, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the strategy without changing the substance of the strategy. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency.
Chapter 3 Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Section 58 page 36 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 58 Nature conservation strategy—conservator to implement If a nature conservation strategy is in force for the ACT, the conservator must take reasonable steps to implement the strategy. 59 Nature conservation strategy—monitoring (1) The conservator must monitor the effectiveness of the nature conservation strategy for the ACT. (2) The conservator must report to the Minister about the nature conservation strategy for the ACT at least once every 5 years. (3) The Minister must consider the report and may take any action the Minister considers appropriate. (4) The Minister must make the report publicly accessible not later than 30 days after the day the conservator gives the report to the Minister. Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website 60 Nature conservation strategy—review (1) The conservator must review the nature conservation strategy every 10 years after the plan commences. (2) However, the Minister may extend the time for conducting the review. (3) In conducting the review, the conservator must— (a) consider each matter mentioned in section 49 (2) (Draft nature conservation strategy—conservator to prepare) in relation to the nature conservation strategy under review; and (b) consult the entities mentioned in section 50; and (c) carry out public consultation in accordance with section 51 (Draft nature conservation strategy—public consultation) as if a reference to a draft nature conservation strategy were a reference to the nature conservation strategy under review..
Nature conservation strategy for the ACT Chapter 3 Section 60 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 37 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) If the public consultation period for the review has ended, the conservator must— (a) consider each submission received during the public consultation period; and (b) if the person who makes a submission during the public consultation period agrees to the conservator making the submission publicly accessible—make the submission publicly accessible; and Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website (c) make any recommendation to the Minister about the strategy under review that the conservator considers appropriate. (5) The recommendation must be accompanied by a report setting out the issues raised in any submissions given to the conservator during the public consultation period for the strategy under review. (6) If the conservator makes a recommendation to the Minister, the Minister must respond to the conservator about the recommendation. (7) If the conservator receives a response from the Minister, the conservator must make the following publicly accessible: (a) the Minister’s response; (b) details of any proposed amendments to the strategy as a result of the review. Note The power to prepare a nature conservation strategy includes the power to amend the strategy. The power to amend the strategy is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the strategy (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.1 Threatened native species Section 61 page 38 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.1 Threatened native species 61 What is a threatened native species? In this Act: threatened native species means a native species listed in the threatened native species list. Note Native species—see s 16. 62 What is a threatened native species list? In this Act: threatened native species list means a list of species notified under section 91 (Final version of list and notification). 63 Threatened native species list—categories (1) The Minister must make a threatened native species list. (2) The list must contain the species eligible to be included in 1 of the following categories (a national category) in the list: (a) extinct; (b) extinct in the wild; (c) critically endangered; (d) endangered; (e) vulnerable; (f) conservation dependent..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Threatened native species Part 4.1 Section 64 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 39 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) The list may contain the species eligible to be included in 1 of the following categories (a regional category) in the list: (a) regionally threatened; (b) regionally conservation dependent; (c) provisional. 64 Threatened native species list—eligibility for national categories (1) A native species is eligible to be included in the extinct category in the threatened native species list if, assessed at a national scale, there is no reasonable doubt that the last member of the species has died. (2) A native species is eligible to be included in the extinct in the wild category in the threatened native species list if, assessed at a national scale— (a) it is known only to survive in cultivation, in captivity or as a naturalised population well outside its past range; or (b) it has not been recorded in its known or expected habitat, at appropriate seasons, anywhere in its past range, despite exhaustive surveys over a time frame appropriate to its life cycle and form. (3) A native species is eligible to be included in the critically endangered category in the threatened native species list if, assessed at a national scale, it is facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild in the immediate future. (4) A native species is eligible to be included in the endangered category in the threatened native species list if, assessed at a national scale— (a) it is not critically endangered; but (b) it is facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near future..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.1 Threatened native species Section 64A page 40 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) A native species is eligible to be included in the vulnerable category in the threatened native species list if, assessed at a national scale— (a) it is not critically endangered or endangered; but (b) it is facing a high risk of extinction in the wild in the medium-term future. (6) A native species is eligible to be included in the conservation dependent category in the threatened native species list if— (a) it is a fish; and (b) it is the subject of a plan of management, within the meaning of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), that identifies actions necessary to stop the decline of, and support the recovery of, the species to maximise its chances of long-term survival in the wild; and (c) the plan of management is in force under a law of the Commonwealth, the Territory or a State; and (d) the ending of the plan may result in the species becoming vulnerable, endangered or critically endangered. (7) In this section: assessed at a national scale, for an item—see section 80. Note Item includes a species (see s 80). fish includes all species of bony fish, sharks, crustaceans, molluscs and other marine organisms, but does not include marine mammals or marine reptiles. 64A Threatened native species list—eligibility for regional categories (1) A native species is eligible to be included in the regionally threatened category in the threatened native species list if— (a) the species occurs or is likely to occur in the ACT; and.
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Threatened native species Part 4.1 Section 64A R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 41 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) there are threatened native species list criteria for the category; and (c) the species satisfies the threatened native species list criteria for the category. (2) A native species is eligible to be included in the regionally conservation dependent category in the threatened native species list if— (a) the species occurs or is likely to occur in the ACT; and (b) there are threatened native species list criteria for the category; and (c) the species satisfies the threatened native species list criteria for the category. (3) A native species is eligible to be included in the provisional category in the threatened native species list if— (a) there is a significant decline in the number of members of the species in the ACT or surrounding region; or (b) the species— (i) occurs or is likely to occur in the ACT or surrounding region; and (ii) is listed as a threatened native species under a law of another jurisdiction corresponding, or substantially corresponding, to this Act; or (c) the species was listed in the extinct category of the threatened native species list but has been definitely located in nature in the ACT or surrounding region since it was last listed as extinct. Note See also s 97 about rediscovery of species that were extinct. (4) A native species is no longer eligible to be included in the provisional category in the threatened native species list if it has been in the category for 18 months..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.1 Threatened native species Section 65 page 42 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) A native species is not eligible to be included in a regional category in the threatened native species list if— (a) it is eligible to be included in a national category in the list; or (b) it is included in the protected native species list. Note Protected native species list—see s 111. (6) However, a native species that is eligible to be included in the extinct category or extinct in the wild category in the threatened native species list may be included in a regional category in the list if the species is introduced or reintroduced into the ACT. Note Species includes a distinct population of biological entities prescribed by regulation to be a species (see s 15 (1), def species, par (b) (iii)). 65 Threatened native species list—eligibility criteria (1) The Minister must develop criteria to be used in deciding whether a species is eligible to be included in a category in the threatened native species list (the threatened native species list criteria). Note The power to make an instrument includes the power to amend or repeal the instrument (see Legislation Act, s 46). (2) The threatened native species list criteria may only include scientific matters. (3) In developing the threatened native species list criteria, the Minister must have regard to— (a) the conservation of the species; and (b) the ecological significance of the species; and (c) any relevant national standards. (4) In developing the threatened native species list criteria, the Minister must consult— (a) the conservator; and (b) the scientific committee..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Threatened native species Part 4.1 Section 66 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 43 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) The threatened native species list criteria are a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 66 Threatened native species list—criteria to review (1) This section applies if the conservator, or the scientific committee, considers that the threatened native species list criteria should be reviewed because— (a) the criteria are not adequately identifying species eligible to be included in a category in the threatened native species list; or (b) there are changes to national or international standards relating to the criteria. (2) The conservator or the scientific committee must recommend to the Minister that the Minister review the threatened native species list criteria. (3) The Minister must consider the recommendation and may— (a) review the threatened native species list criteria under section 65; or (b) refuse to review the threatened native species list criteria. (4) A decision to refuse to review the threatened native species list criteria, including a statement of reasons for the decision, is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.2 Threatened ecological communities Section 67 page 44 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 4.2 Threatened ecological communities 67 What is a threatened ecological community? In this Act: threatened ecological community means an ecological community listed in the threatened ecological communities list. Note Ecological community—see s 17. 68 What is a threatened ecological communities list? In this Act: threatened ecological communities list means a list of ecological communities notified under section 91 (Final version of list and notification). 69 Threatened ecological communities list—categories The Minister must make a threatened ecological communities list— (a) containing the ecological communities eligible to be included in the list; and (b) divided into the following categories: (i) collapsed; (ii) critically endangered; (iii) endangered; (iv) vulnerable; (v) provisional..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Threatened ecological communities Part 4.2 Section 70 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 45 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 70 Threatened ecological communities list—eligibility for categories (1) An ecological community is eligible to be included in the collapsed category in the threatened ecological communities list if there is no reasonable doubt that its defining biotic or abiotic features are lost from all occurrences and the characteristic native biota are no longer sustained. Example Collapse may occur when most of the diagnostic components of the characteristic native biota are lost from the ecological community, or when functional components (biota that perform key roles in ecological community organisation) are greatly reduced in abundance and lose the ability to recruit. (2) An ecological community is eligible to be included in the critically endangered category in the threatened ecological communities list if it is facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild in the immediate future. (3) An ecological community is eligible to be included in the endangered category in the threatened ecological communities list if— (a) it is not critically endangered; but (b) it is facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near future. (4) An ecological community is eligible to be included in the vulnerable category in the threatened ecological communities list if— (a) it is not critically endangered or endangered; but (b) it is facing a high risk of extinction in the wild in the medium-term future. (5) An ecological community is eligible to be included in the provisional category in the threatened ecological communities list if— (a) there is a strong decline in the size of the ecological community in the ACT and the surrounding region; or.
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.2 Threatened ecological communities Section 71 page 46 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the ecological community— (i) exists or is likely to exist in the ACT; and (ii) is listed as a threatened ecological community under a law of another jurisdiction corresponding, or substantially corresponding, to this Act. (6) An ecological community is no longer eligible to be included in the provisional category in the threatened ecological communities list if it has been in the category for 18 months. 71 Threatened ecological communities list—eligibility criteria (1) The Minister must develop criteria to be used in deciding whether an ecological community is eligible to be included in a category in the threatened ecological communities list (the threatened ecological communities list criteria). (2) The threatened ecological communities list criteria may only include scientific matters. (3) In developing the threatened ecological communities list criteria, the Minister must have regard to— (a) the conservation of the ecological community; and (b) the ecological significance of the ecological community; and (c) any relevant national standards. (4) In developing the threatened ecological communities list criteria, the Minister must consult— (a) the conservator; and (b) the scientific committee..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Threatened ecological communities Part 4.2 Section 72 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 47 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) The threatened ecological communities list criteria are a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 72 Threatened ecological communities list criteria—review (1) This section applies if the conservator, or the scientific committee, considers that the threatened ecological communities list criteria should be reviewed because— (a) the criteria are not adequately identifying ecological communities eligible to be included in a category in the threatened ecological communities list; or (b) there are changes to national or international standards relating to the criteria. (2) The conservator or the scientific committee must recommend to the Minister that the Minister review the threatened ecological communities list criteria. (3) The Minister must consider the recommendation and may— (a) review the threatened ecological communities list criteria under section 71; or (b) refuse to review the threatened ecological communities list criteria. (4) A decision to refuse to review the threatened ecological communities list criteria, including a statement of reasons for the decision, is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.3 Key threatening processes Section 73 page 48 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 4.3 Key threatening processes 73 What is a threatening process? In this Act: threatening process means a process that threatens, or may threaten, the survival, abundance or evolutionary development of a native species or ecological community. Note Ecological community—see s 17. Native species—see s 16. 74 What is a key threatening process? In this Act: key threatening process means a threatening process listed in the key threatening processes list. 75 What is a key threatening processes list? In this Act: key threatening processes list means— (a) the key threatening processes list made under section 76; or (b) a key threatening processes list notified under section 91 (Final version of list and notification). 76 Key threatening processes list (1) The Minister may make a key threatening processes list in accordance with this part. (2) The key threatening processes list is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Key threatening processes Part 4.3 Section 77 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 49 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 77 Key threatening processes list—eligibility A threatening process is eligible to be included in the key threatening processes list if— (a) it could cause— (i) a native species to become eligible for listing in the threatened native species list in a category other than conservation dependent; or (ii) an ecological community to become eligible for listing in the threatened ecological communities list; or (b) it could cause— (i) a threatened native species to become eligible to be listed in the threatened native species list in another category representing a higher degree of endangerment; or (ii) a threatened ecological community to become eligible to be listed in the threatened ecological communities list in another category representing a higher degree of endangerment; or (c) it adversely affects 2 or more threatened native species (other than conservation dependent species) or 2 or more threatened ecological communities. 78 Key threatening processes list—eligibility criteria (1) The Minister must develop criteria to be used in deciding whether a threatening process is eligible to be included on the key threatening processes list (the key threatening processes list criteria). (2) The key threatening processes list criteria may only include scientific matters..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.3 Key threatening processes Section 79 page 50 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) In developing the key threatening processes list criteria, the Minister must have regard to— (a) the conservation of threatened native species and threatened ecological communities; and (b) the ecological significance of threatened native species and threatened ecological communities; and (c) any relevant national standards. (4) In developing the key threatening processes list criteria, the Minister must consult— (a) the conservator; and (b) the scientific committee. (5) The key threatening processes list criteria are a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 79 Key threatening processes list criteria—review (1) This section applies if the conservator, or the scientific committee, considers that the key threatening processes list criteria should be reviewed because— (a) the criteria are not adequately identifying processes eligible to be included on the key threatening processes list; or (b) there are changes to national or international standards relating to the criteria. (2) The conservator or the scientific committee must recommend to the Minister that the Minister review the key threatening processes list criteria..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Key threatening processes Part 4.3 Section 79 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 51 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) The Minister must consider the recommendation and may— (a) review the key threatening processes list criteria under section 78; or (b) refuse to review the key threatening processes list criteria. (4) A decision to refuse to review the key threatening processes list criteria, including a statement of reasons for the decision, is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.1 Definitions—pt 4.4 Section 80 page 52 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.1 Definitions—pt 4.4 80 Definitions—pt 4.4 In this part: assessed at a national scale, for an item, means the risk assessment criteria under the common assessment method is applied to the item throughout— (a) Australia or an external Territory; or (b) the coastal sea of Australia or an external Territory; or (c) the seabed of the coastal sea of Australia or an external Territory; or (d) the continental shelf; or (e) the exclusive economic zone. Note Coastal sea—see the dictionary. Continental shelf—see the dictionary. Exclusive economic zone—see the dictionary. Seabed—see the dictionary. common assessment method means the methodology used to assess the risk of extinction of a species or collapse of an ecological community, agreed between— (a) the Commonwealth; and (b) the Territory; and (c) a participating State..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Definitions—pt 4.4 Division 4.4.1 Section 80 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 53 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au item means— (a) for the threatened native species list—a native species; or (b) for the threatened ecological communities list—an ecological community; or (c) for the key threatening processes list—a threatening process. list means— (a) the threatened native species list; or (b) the threatened ecological communities list; or (c) the key threatening processes list. listing assessment—see section 85 (2). nationally threatened, in relation to an item, means— (a) an item that is a listed threatened species or listed ecological community under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth) (a Commonwealth listed item); or (b) an item (a State assessed item) that— (i) is eligible to be a listed threatened species or listed ecological community under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth); and (ii) has been assessed by a participating State as a threatened species or ecological community at a national scale, using the common assessment method; or (c) an item that— (i) is either— (A) eligible to be included in a national category of the threatened native species list; or.
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Section 81 page 54 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (B) eligible to be included in the threatened ecological communities list; and (ii) has been assessed by the Territory as a threatened native species or threatened ecological community at a national scale, using the common assessment method. nomination means a nomination mentioned in— (a) section 81; or (b) section 83. participating State means a State that uses the common assessment method to assess a species or ecological community at a national scale. public consultation notice—see section 84 (1). transfer, an item within a list, means transfer the item from 1 category in the list to another category in the list. Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general 81 Nominations—public may nominate item at any time (1) A person may, at any time, nominate an item to be— (a) included in a list; or (b) transferred within a list; or (c) omitted from a list. (2) A nomination must— (a) comply with any requirements prescribed by regulation for the nomination; and.
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Division 4.4.2 Section 82 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 55 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) be given to the scientific committee. (3) A person who gives the scientific committee a nomination may, in writing, withdraw the nomination at any time. 82 Nominations—scientific committee may reject nomination (1) The scientific committee may reject a nomination if the scientific committee considers that— (a) the nomination is vexatious, frivolous or not made in good faith; or (b) a requirement prescribed by regulation for the nomination has not been complied with; or (c) if the nomination is about including a nationally threatened item in, or transferring a nationally threatened item within, a list, and the item is a Commonwealth listed item or a State assessed item—the inclusion or transfer is more appropriately dealt with under section 90A. (2) If the scientific committee rejects a nomination, the scientific committee must take reasonable steps to tell the person who made the nomination about the rejection and the reason for it. 83 Nominations—scientific committee may nominate items itself The scientific committee may, at any time, nominate an item to be— (a) included in a list; or (b) transferred within a list; or (c) omitted from a list..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Section 84 page 56 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 84 Nominations—public consultation (1) The scientific committee must prepare a notice about a nomination (a public consultation notice) if the nominated item— (a) is a native species nominated to be included in, transferred within or omitted from a national category in the threatened native species list; or (b) is an ecological community nominated to be included in, transferred within or omitted from the threatened ecological community list. (2) In any other case, the scientific committee may prepare a public consultation notice about a nomination. (3) A public consultation notice— (a) must state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the scientific committee about the nomination; and (ii) submissions may be given to the scientific committee only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) must include the nomination; and (c) may invite people to comment on other matters that the scientific committee considers relevant. Note The public consultation notice need not contain the precise location of the species (see s 363). (4) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Division 4.4.2 Section 85 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 57 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) If the scientific committee notifies a public consultation notice for a nomination— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the scientific committee about the nomination; and (b) the submission may be given to the scientific committee only during the public consultation period for the nomination; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (6) The scientific committee may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the nomination. 85 Nominations—scientific committee to carry out listing assessment (1) This section applies if— (a) the scientific committee does not notify a public consultation notice for a nomination under section 84 within 4 weeks after receiving the nomination or nominating the item itself; or (b) the public consultation period for a nomination has ended. (2) The scientific committee must assess the nominated item (a listing assessment). (3) A listing assessment for a nominated item must assess— (a) whether the item is eligible for inclusion in, or transfer within, a list; and.
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Section 85 page 58 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) if eligible for inclusion or transfer—the category (if any) of the list the item is eligible to be included in or transferred to. Note Eligibility for the threatened native species list is dealt with in s 64 and s 64A. Eligibility for the threatened ecological communities list is dealt with in s 70. Eligibility for the key threatening processes list is dealt with in s 77. (4) In carrying out a listing assessment for a nominated item, the scientific committee must consider— (a) if public consultation about the item has been carried out under section 84—any submissions received during the public consultation period for the item; and (b) the eligibility of the item for the list under— (i) for a species—the threatened native species list criteria; or (ii) for an ecological community—the threatened ecological communities list criteria; or (iii) for a threatening process—the key threatening processes list criteria; and Note Threatened native species list criteria—see s 65. Threatened ecological communities list criteria—see s 71. Key threatening processes list criteria—see s 78. (c) the effect that including, transferring or omitting the item could have on the survival of the species or ecological community concerned. (5) The scientific committee must give a listing assessment for an item to the Minister not later than 15 months after the end of the 4-week period, or public consultation period, mentioned in subsection (1). (6) However, the Minister may extend the time for giving the listing assessment under subsection (5)..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Division 4.4.2 Section 87 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 59 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 87 Minister to decide whether to include, transfer or omit item (1) Not later than 3 months after the Minister receives a listing assessment for an item, the Minister must decide whether to— (a) include, or refuse to include, an item in a list under section 88; or (b) transfer, or refuse to transfer, an item within a list under section 89; or (c) omit, or refuse to omit, an item from a list under section 90. Note The Minister may include certain nationally threatened items in a list without a nomination under div 4.4.3. (2) If the decision is to include, transfer or omit an item, the Minister must— (a) revise the list; and (b) prepare a final version of the list. Note The final version of the list is a notifiable instrument (see s 91). (3) The Minister must take reasonable steps to tell the following people about the decision: (a) if the item was nominated by a person under section 81—the person who made the nomination; (b) if a person made a submission to the scientific committee under section 84—the person who made the submission..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Section 88 page 60 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 88 Minister’s decision—include item (1) The Minister may include an item in a list, or category in a list, only if satisfied that the item is eligible to be included in the list or category. Note Eligibility for the threatened native species list is dealt with in s 64 and s 64A. Eligibility for the threatened ecological communities list is dealt with in s 70. Eligibility for the key threatening processes list is dealt with in s 77. (2) In deciding whether to include an item, the Minister may only consider— (a) the listing assessment for the item; and (b) the eligibility of the item for the list under— (i) for a species—the threatened native species list criteria; or (ii) for an ecological community—the threatened ecological communities list criteria; or (iii) for a threatening process—the key threatening processes list criteria; and Note Threatened native species list criteria—see s 65. Threatened ecological communities list criteria—see s 71. Key threatening processes list criteria—see s 78. (c) if the item is a species or ecological community—the effect that including the item may have on the survival of the item..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Division 4.4.2 Section 89 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 61 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 89 Minister’s decision—transfer item (1) The Minister may transfer an item from 1 category in a list to another category in a list (the new category) only if satisfied that the item is eligible to be included in the new category. Note 1 Eligibility for the threatened native species list is dealt with in s 64 and s 64A. Eligibility for the threatened ecological communities list is dealt with in s 70. Note 2 There are no categories in the key threatening processes list. (2) In deciding whether to include an item, the Minister may only consider— (a) the listing assessment for the item; and (b) the eligibility of the item for the new category under— (i) for a species—the threatened native species list criteria; or (ii) for an ecological community—the threatened ecological communities list criteria; and Note Threatened native species list criteria—see s 65. Threatened ecological communities list criteria—see s 71. (c) the effect that transferring the item may have on the survival of the item. 90 Minister’s decision—omit item (1) The Minister may omit an item from a list only if satisfied that— (a) the item is no longer eligible to be included in the list; or.
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.2 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general Section 90 page 62 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) for a native species or ecological community—the inclusion of the item in the list is not contributing, or will not contribute, to the survival of the item. Note Eligibility for the threatened native species list is dealt with in s 64 and s 64A. Eligibility for the threatened ecological communities list is dealt with in s 70. Eligibility for the key threatening processes list is dealt with in s 77. (2) In deciding whether to omit an item from a list, the Minister may only consider— (a) the listing assessment for the item; and (b) the eligibility of the item for the list under— (i) for a species—the threatened native species list criteria; or (ii) for an ecological community—the threatened ecological communities list criteria; or (iii) for a threatening process—the key threatening processes list criteria; and Note Threatened native species list criteria—see s 65. Threatened ecological communities list criteria—see s 71. Key threatening processes list criteria—see s 78. (c) if the item is a species or ecological community—the effect that the inclusion of the item in the list is having, or may have, on the survival of the item..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Including or transferring certain nationally threatened items Division 4.4.3 Section 90A R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 63 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 4.4.3 Including or transferring certain nationally threatened items 90A Minister may include or transfer nationally threatened items without nomination (1) This section applies to a nationally threatened item that is a Commonwealth listed item or a State assessed item (a relevant item). (2) The Minister may, without a nomination— (a) include a relevant item in a list; or (b) transfer a relevant item from 1 category in a list to another category in a list. (3) Before including a relevant item in, or transferring a relevant item within, a list, the Minister must— (a) consult with the scientific committee; and (b) consider any recommendations of the scientific committee. (4) A relevant item may only be included in, or transferred to, a national category in a list that corresponds with— (a) for a Commonwealth listed item—the category in which the Commonwealth lists the item; and (b) for a State assessed item—the category in which the State assesses the item is eligible to be listed. (5) If the Minister decides to include a relevant item in, or transfer a relevant item within, a list under this section, the Minister must— (a) revise the list; and (b) prepare a final version of the list. Note The final version of the list is a notifiable instrument (see s 91)..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.4 Conservation advice Section 90B page 64 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 4.4.4 Conservation advice 90B Conservation advice guidelines (1) The Minister may make guidelines (the conservation advice guidelines) about the preparation of a conservation advice for an item, including— (a) information to be included in a conservation advice; and (b) requirements for the preparation of a conservation advice. (2) A guideline is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. 90C Conservation advice (1) The scientific committee must prepare an advice about each item included in a list (a conservation advice). (2) However, the scientific committee need not prepare a conservation advice for an item if— (a) the committee adopts an advice for the item under section 90E (Conservation advice—adopting advice for nationally threatened item); or (b) the item is listed in a provisional category of a threatened native species list or a threatened ecological communities list. Note For a nationally threatened item, an advice adopted under s 90E is the conservation advice. (3) The conservation advice must— (a) set out— (i) the grounds on which the item is eligible to be included in, transferred within, or omitted from, the list; and (ii) the main factors that make it eligible; and.
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Conservation advice Division 4.4.4 Section 90E R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 65 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) include anything else required to be included by a conservation advice guideline. Note 1 The conservation advice need not contain the precise location of a species or community (see s 363). Note 2 Eligibility for the threatened native species list is dealt with in s 64 and s 64A. Eligibility for the threatened ecological communities list is dealt with in s 70. Eligibility for the key threatening processes list is dealt with in s 77. (4) A conservation advice, including a conservation advice adopted under section 90E, is a notifiable instrument. Note 1 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make an instrument includes the power to amend or repeal the instrument (see Legislation Act, s 46). (5) However, a conservation advice must be notified within 20 days after the following happens: (a) the Minister makes a decision to include an item on a list or transfer an item within a list; (b) the scientific committee amends the conservation advice. (6) In this section: conservation advice guidelines—see section 90B (1). 90E Conservation advice—adopting advice for nationally threatened item (1) This section applies to a nationally threatened item. (2) The scientific committee may adopt an advice prepared by the Commonwealth or a participating State for the item if the advice corresponds, or substantially corresponds, with the requirements for a conservation advice mentioned in section 90C (3)..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.5 Final version of list and notification Section 90F page 66 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) If the scientific committee adopts an advice for the item under this section, the advice is taken to be the conservation advice for the item. (4) In this section: conservation advice guidelines—see section 90B (1). 90F Conservation advice—scientific committee to review (1) The scientific committee may review a conservation advice on its own initiative or at the conservator’s request. (2) Following the review of the conservation advice, the scientific committee may make amendments to the advice. Division 4.4.5 Final version of list and notification 91 Final version of list and notification (1) The final version of— (a) a list of species prepared under section 87, section 90A or section 94 is a threatened native species list; and (b) a list of ecological communities prepared under section 87, section 90A or section 94 is a threatened ecological communities list; and (c) a list of processes prepared under section 87, section 90A or section 94 is a key threatening processes list. (2) Each of the following is a notifiable instrument: (a) a threatened native species list; (b) a threatened ecological communities list;.
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Minor amendments of list Division 4.4.6 Section 93 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 67 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) a key threatening processes list. Note 1 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a list includes the power to amend or repeal the list. The power to amend or repeal the list is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the list (see Legislation Act, s 46). Division 4.4.6 Minor amendments of list 93 What is a minor amendment?—div 4.4.6 In this division: minor amendment, of a list, means an amendment to— (a) include a species in the threatened native species list in the circumstances mentioned in section 95 (Minor amendment— including similar species); or (b) omit a species from the threatened native species list in the circumstances mentioned in section 96 (Minor amendment— omitting similar species); or (c) transfer a species from the extinct category to the provisional category of the threatened native species list in the circumstances mentioned in section 97 (Minor amendment— rediscovery of extinct species); or (d) update the name of a threatened native species or threatened ecological community; or (e) correct an inaccuracy..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Division 4.4.6 Minor amendments of list Section 94 page 68 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 94 Minister may make minor amendments (1) This section applies if the Minister considers that a minor amendment to a list is appropriate. (2) The Minister— (a) may prepare a new list, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing list; and (b) need not comply with the requirements in section 84 (Nominations—public consultation) to section 90A (Minister may include or transfer nationally threatened items without nomination); and (c) may prepare a final version of the new list, as amended. Note The final version of the new list is a threatened native species list, threatened ecological communities list, or key threatening processes list and is a notifiable instrument (see s 91). 95 Minor amendment—including similar species (1) A minor amendment of the threatened native species list may be appropriate if the amendment is to include a native species in a certain category of the list (the ineligible species) because— (a) it so closely resembles in appearance, at any stage of its biological development, a species that is included in the category (the eligible species) that it is difficult to differentiate between the 2 species; and (b) this difficulty poses an additional threat to the eligible species; and (c) it would substantially promote the objects of this Act if the ineligible species were included in the category. (2) In deciding whether a minor amendment is appropriate, the Minister must obtain and consider the advice of the scientific committee..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Including, transferring and omitting items in list Part 4.4 Minor amendments of list Division 4.4.6 Section 96 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 69 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) If an ineligible species is included in a category of the threatened native species list under subsection (1) and the eligible species is— (a) transferred to another category of the list, the ineligible species is also transferred to the other category; and (b) omitted from the list, the ineligible species is also omitted from the list. (4) In this section: certain category, of the threatened native species list, means— (a) critically endangered; or (b) endangered; or (c) vulnerable. Note Eligibility for critically endangered category, endangered category and vulnerable category (see s 64 (3) to (5)). 96 Minor amendment—omitting similar species (1) A minor amendment of the threatened native species list may be appropriate if the amendment is to omit an ineligible species included under section 95 because its inclusion is not having a significant beneficial effect on the survival of the eligible species. (2) In deciding whether a minor amendment is appropriate, the Minister must obtain and consider the advice of the scientific committee. 97 Minor amendment—rediscovery of extinct species (1) A minor amendment of the threatened native species list may be appropriate if the amendment is to transfer a species from the extinct category to the provisional category because the species has been definitely located in nature. (2) In deciding whether a minor amendment is appropriate, the Minister need not obtain and consider advice from the scientific committee..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.5 Action plans Section 98 page 70 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 4.5 Action plans 98 Definitions—Act In this Act: regular migratory species means a listed migratory species that regularly occurs in the ACT. Note Listed migratory species—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), s 528. relevant ecological community means the following: (a) a critically endangered ecological community; (b) an endangered ecological community; (c) a vulnerable ecological community. relevant species means— (a) a regular migratory species; and (b) the following species, other than a species that the Minister decides, under section 100A, does not need an action plan: (i) a critically endangered species; (ii) an endangered species; (iii) a vulnerable species; (iv) a regionally threatened species; (v) a regionally conservation dependent species..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Action plans Part 4.5 Section 99 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 71 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 99 What is an action plan?—pt 4.5 In this part: action plan, for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process, means a plan for the species, ecological community or process, notified under section 105 (Draft action plan—final version and notification). Note Key threatening process—see s 74. 100 What is a draft action plan?—pt 4.5 In this part: draft action plan, for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process— (a) means a draft plan that— (i) for a relevant species— (A) sets out proposals to ensure, as far as practicable, the identification, protection and survival of the species; and (B) if there is a known critical habitat for the species— identifies the critical habitat; and (C) for regular migratory species—may include maps of potential habitats of the species; and (D) may propose management strategies to ensure the persistence of the species; and (E) may state requirements for monitoring the species and its habitats; and.
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.5 Action plans Section 100 page 72 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) for a relevant ecological community— (A) sets out proposals to ensure, as far as practicable, the identification, protection and survival of the community; and (B) if there is a known critical habitat for the community—identifies the critical habitat; and (iii) for a key threatening process—sets out proposals to minimise any effect of the process that threatens a relevant species or relevant ecological community; and Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48). (b) includes anything required to be included by a conservator guideline; and Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23. (c) may apply, adopt or incorporate an instrument as in force from time to time. Examples—instrument that may be applied, adopted or incorporated 1 a native species conservation plan, for a native species (see s 115) 2 a recovery plan under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), s 269A Note 1 The text of an applied, adopted or incorporated law or instrument, whether applied as in force from time to time or at a particular time, is taken to be a notifiable instrument if the operation of the Legislation Act, s 47 (5) or (6) is not disapplied (see s 47 (7)). Note 2 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Action plans Part 4.5 Section 100A R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 73 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 100A Minister to decide if action plan needed (1) This section applies to each of the following species (an applicable species): (a) a critically endangered species; (b) an endangered species; (c) a vulnerable species; (d) a regionally threatened species; (e) a regionally conservation dependent species. (2) Before an applicable species is included in, or transferred within, a list, the Minister must decide whether an action plan needs to be prepared for the species. (3) In deciding whether an action plan needs to be prepared for an applicable species, the Minister must seek the advice of the scientific committee. (4) The Minister may decide that an action plan does not need to be prepared for an item if satisfied that— (a) the species does not occur in the ACT or occurs infrequently in the ACT; or (b) having no plan will not increase the risk of extinction of the species. (5) In this section: list—see section 80..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.5 Action plans Section 101 page 74 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 101 Draft action plan—conservator to prepare (1) The conservator must prepare a draft action plan for each relevant species, relevant ecological community and key threatening process. Note The draft action plan need not contain the precise location of the species, community or critical habitat (see s 363). (2) However, the conservator need not prepare a draft action plan— (a) for a species mentioned in section 100A—if the Minister has decided that an action plan is not needed for the species; or (b) for a relevant species—if the species is the subject of a native species conservation plan. Note Native species conservation plan, for a native species—see s 115. (3) In preparing a draft action plan for a relevant species or relevant ecological community, the conservator must consider— (a) the impact of climate change on the species or ecological community; and (b) threats to the species or ecological community; and (c) connectivity requirements of the species or ecological community; and (d) critical habitat of the species or ecological community. Note Critical habitat—see the dictionary. 102 Draft action plan—consultation with scientific committee In preparing a draft action plan, the conservator must consult the scientific committee..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Action plans Part 4.5 Section 103 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 75 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 103 Draft action plan—public consultation (1) If the conservator prepares a draft action plan, the conservator must also prepare a notice about the draft action plan (a public consultation notice). (2) A public consultation notice must— (a) state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft action plan; and (ii) submissions may be given to the conservator only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) include the draft action plan. (3) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the conservator notifies a public consultation notice for a draft action plan— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft plan; and (b) the submission may be given to the conservator only during the public consultation period for the draft plan; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (5) The conservator may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the draft action plan..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.5 Action plans Section 104 page 76 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 104 Draft action plan—revision If the public consultation period for a draft action plan has ended, the conservator must— (a) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period; and (b) make any revisions to the draft plan that the conservator considers appropriate; and (c) prepare a final version of the draft plan. 105 Draft action plan—final version and notification (1) The final version of a draft action plan prepared under section 104 or section 106 is an action plan. (2) An action plan is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make an action plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). 106 Action plan—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) an action plan for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process is in force (the existing plan); and (b) the conservator considers that minor amendments to the existing plan are appropriate..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Action plans Part 4.5 Section 107 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 77 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) The conservator— (a) may prepare a new draft action plan for the species, community or process, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing plan; and (b) need not comply with the consultation requirements in section 103 (Draft action plan—public consultation); and (c) may prepare a final version of the new draft action plan, as amended. Note The final version of the new draft action plan is an action plan and is a disallowable instrument (see s 105). (3) In this section: minor amendment, of an action plan, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the plan without changing the substance of the plan. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency 107 Action plan—conservator to implement If an action plan is in force for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process, the conservator must take reasonable steps to implement the plan..
Chapter 4 Threatened native species and ecological communities Part 4.5 Action plans Section 108 page 78 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 108 Action plan—monitoring and review (1) The conservator must— (a) monitor the effectiveness of an action plan; and (b) make the findings of the monitoring publicly accessible. Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website (2) However, if the conservator considers that a species or ecological community could be threatened by the disclosure of a particular detail in a finding, the conservator— (a) need not include the particular detail; but (b) must instead include a general statement about the finding. (3) The conservator must report to the Minister about each action plan at least once every 5 years. (4) The Minister must make the report publicly accessible not later than 30 days after the day the conservator gives the report to the Minister. (5) The scientific committee must review an action plan— (a) every 10 years after the plan commences; and (b) at any other time at the conservator’s request. (6) However, the Minister may extend the time for conducting the review under subsection (5) (a). (7) In reviewing an action plan, the scientific committee may make recommendations to the conservator about the plan, including that the plan is no longer needed for a species..
Threatened native species and ecological communities Chapter 4 Action plans Part 4.5 Section 108A R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 79 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 108A Action plan—ending action plan after review (1) This section applies if the scientific committee recommends to the conservator that an action plan is no longer needed for a species under section 108 (7). (2) The conservator may request that the Minister end the action plan. (3) If the Minister receives a request from the conservator, the Minister must decide whether to end the action plan. (4) In deciding whether to end the action plan, the Minister must have regard to the recommendation of the scientific committee. (5) The Minister may end the action plan if satisfied that ending the plan will not increase the risk of extinction of the species the subject of the plan..
Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.1 Special protection status Section 109 page 80 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 5 Protection of native species— conservation plans Part 5.1 Special protection status 109 What is special protection status? (1) In this Act: special protection status—a native species has special protection status if it is— (a) a threatened native species; or Note Threatened native species—see s 61. (b) a listed threatened species; or (c) a listed migratory species. Note Listed migratory species—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), s 528. (2) In this section: listed threatened species—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), section 528. Note 1 The conservator may make a native species conservation plan for a species that has special protection status (see pt 5.3). Note 2 The conservator must make an action plan for regular migratory species (see s 101)..
Protection of native species—conservation plans Chapter 5 Protected native species Part 5.2 Section 110 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 81 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 5.2 Protected native species 110 What is a protected native species? In this Act: protected native species means a native species listed in the protected native species list. 111 Minister to make protected native species list (1) The Minister must make a list of native species that are protected native species (the protected native species list). Note Native species—see s 16. (2) The protected native species list must be divided into the following categories: (a) restricted trade; (b) rare; (c) data deficient; (d) any other category prescribed by regulation. (3) The protected native species list is a notifiable instrument. Note 1 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make the list includes the power to amend or repeal the list. The power to amend or repeal the list is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the list (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.2 Protected native species Section 112 page 82 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 112 Protected native species list—eligibility (1) A native species is eligible to be included in the restricted trade category in the protected native species list if unrestricted trade in the species is likely to have a negative impact on populations of the species in the wild. (2) A native species is eligible to be included in the rare category in the protected native species list if— (a) it is not a threatened native species; and Note Threatened native species—see s 61. (b) it does not have special protection status; and Note Special protection status—see s 109. (c) it is rare in the ACT. (3) A native species is eligible to be included in the data deficient category in the protected native species list if there is insufficient information about the species in the ACT for the species to be eligible to be— (a) a threatened native species; or Note Threatened native species—see s 61. (b) included in any other category in the protected native species list. 113 Minister to develop criteria and processes for protected native species list (1) The Minister must develop criteria to be used in deciding whether a species is eligible to be included in a category on the protected native species list (the protected native species list criteria). (2) The protected native species list criteria may only include scientific matters..
Protection of native species—conservation plans Chapter 5 Protected native species Part 5.2 Section 114 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 83 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) In developing the protected native species list criteria, the Minister must— (a) have regard to the conservation of the species; and (b) consult the scientific committee. (4) The protected native species list criteria are a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. (5) The Minister must also develop processes to be followed in deciding whether a species is to be included in a category in the protected native species list. (6) The processes are a disallowable instrument. 114 Protected native species list criteria—review (1) This section applies if the conservator, or the scientific committee, considers that the protected native species list criteria should be reviewed because— (a) the criteria are not adequately identifying species eligible to be included in a category on the protected native species list; or (b) there are changes to national or international standards relating to the criteria. (2) The conservator, or the scientific committee, must recommend to the Minister that the Minister review the protected native species list criteria. (3) The Minister must consider the recommendation and may— (a) review the protected native species list criteria under section 113; or (b) refuse to review the protected native species list criteria..
Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.2 Protected native species Section 114 page 84 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) A decision to refuse to review the protected native species list criteria, including a statement of reasons for the decision, is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Protection of native species—conservation plans Chapter 5 Native species conservation plans Part 5.3 Section 115 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 85 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 5.3 Native species conservation plans 115 What is a native species conservation plan? In this Act: native species conservation plan, for a native species, means a plan for the species on stated land, notified under section 122 (Draft native species conservation plan—final version and notification). Note The power to make an instrument includes the power to amend or repeal the instrument. The power to amend or repeal the instrument is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the instrument (see Legislation Act, s 46). 116 What is a draft native species conservation plan?—pt 5.3 In this part: draft native species conservation plan, for a native species on stated land— (a) means a draft plan detailing how the native species may be appropriately managed on the stated land; and (b) includes anything required to be included by a conservator guideline; and Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23. (c) may apply, adopt or incorporate an instrument as in force from time to time. Example—instrument that may be applied, adopted or incorporated a fisheries management plan under the Fisheries Act 2000 Note 1 The text of an applied, adopted or incorporated law or instrument, whether applied as in force from time to time or at a particular time, is taken to be a notifiable instrument if the operation of the Legislation Act, s 47 (5) or (6) is not disapplied (see s 47 (7)). Note 2 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.3 Native species conservation plans Section 117 page 86 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Note 3 A native species conservation plan may include provisions about carrying on an activity that would usually require a nature conservation licence. If a person intends to carry on the activity under a plan, the person must apply for a nature conservation licence in the usual way. 117 Draft native species conservation plan—conservator to prepare The conservator may prepare a draft native species conservation plan for stated land for— (a) a native species that has special protection status; or Note Special protection status—see s 109. (b) any other native species the conservator considers appropriate for a native species conservation plan. Note 1 Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48). Note 2 A species that is the subject of a native species conservation plan is eligible to be included in the conservation dependent category in the threatened native species list if the ending of the plan may result in the species becoming vulnerable, endangered or critically endangered (see s 64A (2)). Note 3 The draft native species conservation plan need not contain the precise location of the species (see s 363). 118 Draft native species conservation plan—consultation with scientific committee In preparing a draft native species conservation plan, the conservator must consult the scientific committee..
Protection of native species—conservation plans Chapter 5 Native species conservation plans Part 5.3 Section 119 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 87 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 119 Draft native species conservation plan—consultation with lessee and custodian (1) In preparing a draft native species conservation plan for stated land, the conservator must consult the relevant person for the stated land if the plan requires the person to do or not do something. (2) However, the conservator need not consult the relevant person in relation to something the person may do under the plan even though, if done, the thing must be done in the way stated in the plan. (3) In this section: relevant person, for stated land, means— (a) if the land is leased land—the lessee of the land; and (b) if the land is unleased land or public land—the custodian of the land. 120 Draft native species conservation plan—public consultation (1) If the conservator prepares a draft native species conservation plan, the conservator must also prepare a notice about the draft native species conservation plan (a public consultation notice). (2) A public consultation notice must— (a) state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft native species conservation plan; and (ii) submissions may be given to the conservator only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) include the draft native species conservation plan..
Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.3 Native species conservation plans Section 121 page 88 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the conservator notifies a public consultation notice for a draft native species conservation plan— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft plan; and (b) the submission may be given to the conservator only during the public consultation period for the draft plan; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (5) The conservator may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the draft plan. 121 Draft native species conservation plan—revision If the public consultation period for a draft native species conservation plan has ended, the conservator must— (a) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period; and (b) make any revisions to the draft plan that the conservator considers appropriate; and (c) prepare a final version of the draft plan..
Protection of native species—conservation plans Chapter 5 Native species conservation plans Part 5.3 Section 122 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 89 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 122 Draft native species conservation plan—final version and notification (1) The final version of a draft native species conservation plan prepared under section 121 or section 123 is a native species conservation plan. (2) A native species conservation plan is a notifiable instrument. Note 1 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a native species conservation plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). 123 Native species conservation plan—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) a native species conservation plan for a native species is in force (the existing plan); and (b) the conservator considers that minor amendments to the existing plan are appropriate. (2) The conservator— (a) may prepare a new draft native species conservation plan for the native species, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing plan; and (b) need not comply with the consultation requirements in section 119 to section 121; and (c) may prepare a final version of the new draft native species conservation plan, as amended. Note The final version of the new draft native species conservation plan is a native species conservation plan and is a notifiable instrument (see s 122)..
Chapter 5 Protection of native species—conservation plans Part 5.3 Native species conservation plans Section 124 page 90 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) In this section: minor amendment, of a native species conservation plan, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the plan without changing the substance of the plan. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency 124 Native species conservation plan—conservator etc to implement If a native species conservation plan is in force for a native species on stated land, the following people must take reasonable steps to implement the plan: (a) the conservator; (b) if the land is leased land—the lessee of the land; (c) if the land is unleased land or public land—the custodian of the land. 125 Native species conservation plan—monitoring and review (1) The conservator must— (a) monitor the effectiveness of a native species conservation plan; and (b) make the findings of the monitoring publicly accessible. Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website.
Protection of native species—conservation plans Chapter 5 Native species conservation plans Part 5.3 Section 125 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 91 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) However, if the conservator considers that a species could be threatened by the disclosure of a particular detail in a finding, the conservator— (a) need not include the particular detail; but (b) must instead include a general statement about the finding. (3) The conservator may ask the scientific committee to review a native species conservation plan. (4) In reviewing a native species conservation plan, the scientific committee may make recommendations to the conservator about the plan..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.1 Definitions—pt 6.1 Section 126 page 92 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 6 Protection of native species— offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.1 Definitions—pt 6.1 126 Definitions—pt 6.1 In this part: sell includes— (a) sell by wholesale, retail, auction or tender; and (b) barter or exchange; and (c) supply for profit or other commercial gain; and (d) offer for sale, receive for sale or expose for sale; and (e) have in possession for sale. take includes— (a) for an animal—harvest, catch, capture and trap; and (b) for a plant—harvest, pick, gather and cut..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native animals Division 6.1.2 Section 127 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 93 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 6.1.2 Native animals 127 Definitions—div 6.1.2 In this division: interfere with an item, includes damage or destroy the item. nest, of an animal, includes— (a) a place, structure or object that is being, or has been within the previous 2 years, used as a nesting place by the animal; or (b) a partially constructed nest that has not been used as a nesting place by the animal. 128 Offence—interfere with nest of native animal (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) interferes with— (i) the nest of an animal; or (ii) something in the immediate environment of the nest of an animal; and (b) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. Note Interfere with an item—see s 127. Nest, of an animal—see s 127. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person interferes with— (i) the nest of an animal; or (ii) something in the immediate environment of the nest of an animal; and.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.2 Native animals Section 129 page 94 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the animal— (i) is a native animal; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 129 Offence—interfere with nest of native animal—endanger progeny or breeding (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person interferes with— (i) the nest of an animal; or (ii) something in the immediate environment of the nest of an animal; and (b) the interference— (i) places the animal or its progeny in danger of death; or (ii) places the animal in danger of not being able to breed— (A) if the interference happens during the animal’s breeding season—during the breeding season; or (B) in any other case—during the animal’s next breeding season; and.
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native animals Division 6.1.2 Section 129 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 95 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Interfere with an item—see s 127. Nest, of an animal—see s 127. Progeny—see s (5). (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person interferes with— (i) the nest of an animal; or (ii) something in the immediate environment of the nest of an animal; and (b) the interference— (i) places the animal or its progeny in danger of death; or (ii) places the animal in danger of not being able to breed— (A) if the interference happens during the animal’s breeding season—during the breeding season; or (B) in any other case—during the animal’s next breeding season; and (c) the animal— (i) is a native animal; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person believed on reasonable grounds that— (a) the danger did not exist; or.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.2 Native animals Section 130 page 96 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) for an offence involving interference with a nest—the thing interfered with was not a nest; or (c) for an offence involving interference with something in the immediate environment of a nest—the thing interfered with was not in the immediate environment of a nest. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. (5) In this section: progeny, of an animal— (a) means any descendant of the animal; and (b) includes any animal reproductive material of the animal. 130 Offence—kill native animal (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person engages in conduct; and (b) the conduct causes the death of an animal; and (c) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person engages in conduct; and (b) the conduct causes the death of an animal; and (c) the animal— (i) is a native animal; and.
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native animals Division 6.1.2 Section 131 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 97 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the death of the animal was caused— (a) in circumstances in which the animal was a danger to the person; or (b) by an accidental collision with a motor vehicle. (4) This section does not apply to a person if— (a) the animal is a fish that— (i) has special protection status; or (ii) is a protected native species; and (b) the conduct constituting the offence is consistent with a native species conservation plan for the animal. Example The Murray cod is a nationally threatened species that is stocked in Canberra’s lakes. Fishing for Murray cod in areas and at times identified in the native species conservation plan for Murray cod would not be an offence. Note 1 Native species conservation plan, for a native species—see s 115. Note 2 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) and s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (5) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 131 Offence—injure or endanger native animal (1) A person commits an offence if—.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.2 Native animals Section 131 page 98 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (a) the person engages in conduct; and (b) the conduct causes injury to an animal; and (c) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person engages in conduct; and (b) the conduct places an animal in danger of injury or death; and (c) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the injury or endangerment of the animal was caused— (a) in circumstances in which the animal was a danger to the person; or (b) by an accidental collision. (4) This section does not apply to a person if— (a) the animal is a fish that— (i) has special protection status; or (ii) is a protected native species; and (b) the conduct constituting the offence is consistent with a native species conservation plan for the animal. Note 1 Native species conservation plan, for a native species—see s 115. Note 2 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) and s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (5) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native animals Division 6.1.2 Section 132 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 99 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 132 Offence—take native animal (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes an animal, whether dead or alive; and (b) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Take—see s 126. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes an animal, whether dead or alive; and (b) the animal— (i) is a native animal; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the animal is suffering from a disease, illness or injury and the person takes the animal to give it to— (a) a conservation officer; or (b) a veterinary practitioner; or (c) someone licensed to keep the animal. Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. (4) This section does not apply to a person if— (a) the animal is a fish that— (i) has special protection status; or.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.2 Native animals Section 133 page 100 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) is a protected native species; and (b) the conduct constituting the offence is consistent with a native species conservation plan for the animal. Note 1 Native species conservation plan, for a native species—see s 115. Note 2 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) and s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (5) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 133 Offence—keep non-exempt animal (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person keeps an animal; and (b) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Exempt animal—see s 154. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person keeps an animal; and (b) the animal has special protection status; and (c) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native animals Division 6.1.2 Section 134 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 101 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) This section does not apply to a person if— (a) the animal is suffering from a disease, illness or injury; and (b) the person keeps the animal to give it to— (i) a conservation officer; or (ii) a veterinary practitioner; or (iii) someone licensed to keep the animal; and (c) the person keeps the animal for not more than 48 hours. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (4) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 134 Offence—sell non-exempt animal (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person sells an animal; and (b) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Exempt animal—see s 154. Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person sells an animal; and (b) the animal has special protection status; and.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.2 Native animals Section 135 page 102 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 135 Offence—offer to sell animal without disclosing licence (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person holds a nature conservation licence to sell an animal; and (b) the person offers to sell the animal; and (c) the offer does not disclose— (i) that the person is licensed to sell the animal; and (ii) the person’s licence number. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native animals Division 6.1.2 Section 136 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 103 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 136 Offence—import non-exempt animal (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person imports an animal into the ACT; and (b) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Exempt animal—see s 154. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person imports an animal into the ACT; and (b) the animal has special protection status; and (c) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 137 Offence—export non-exempt animal (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person exports an animal from the ACT; and (b) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Exempt animal—see s 154..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.2 Native animals Section 138 page 104 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person exports an animal from the ACT; and (b) the animal has special protection status; and (c) the animal is not an exempt animal. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 138 Offence—release animal from captivity (1) A person commits an offence if the person releases an animal from captivity. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to the release of a dog or a cat if the release would not constitute an offence under the Domestic Animals Act 2000. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (4) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this section if the defendant proves that the defendant took all reasonable precautions and exercised all appropriate diligence to prevent the commission of the offence. (5) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 139 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 105 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 6.1.3 Native plants 139 Definitions—div 6.1.3 In this division: built-up urban area—see the Tree Protection Act 2005, section 7 (2) (Application of Act—built-up urban areas). damage, a tree, includes the following: (a) kill or destroy the tree; (b) poison the tree; (c) ringbark the tree (whether partially or completely); (d) fell or remove the tree; (e) cut branches or stems of the tree between branch unions; (f) remove branches of the tree to a previously pruned or lopped point; (g) major pruning of the tree; (h) anything else done to or in relation to the tree that— (i) causes it to die; or (ii) significantly reduces its expected life; or (iii) significantly and adversely affects its health, stability or general appearance. native timber— (a) means timber from a tree that is a native plant, whether living or dead; and (b) includes— (i) a standing or fallen native tree; and.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 140 page 106 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) any material from a standing or fallen native tree; but (c) does not include a tree seedling. native tree— (a) means a tree that is a native plant, whether living or dead; but (b) does not include a tree seedling. plant tag, for a plant, means a tag made of durable material that displays the following details: (a) the name of the person proposing to sell or export the plant; (b) the botanical name and common name (if any) of the plant. tree seedling means a tree that is not more than 2m high. 140 Offence—take native plant—unleased land (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes a plant; and (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) on unleased land. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Take—see s 126. (2) This section does not apply to a person if the person— (a) is a public servant exercising a function as a public servant; or (b) is authorised to take the plant under a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals); or.
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 141 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 107 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) only takes seeds from the plant for domestic use. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (3) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 141 Offence—take and sell native plant—unleased land (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes a plant; and (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) on unleased land; and (c) the person sells the plant. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). Take—see s 126. (2) This section does not apply to a person if the plant is native timber. Note 1 Native timber—see s 139. Note 2 It is an offence to damage a native tree on unleased land (see s 144). It is also an offence to take fallen native timber from unleased land (see s 146). Note 3 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (3) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 142 page 108 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 142 Offence—take native plant—protected native species (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes a plant; and (b) the plant is a protected native species. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Protected native species—see s 110. Take—see s 126. (2) This section does not apply to a person if the person— (a) is a public servant exercising a function as a public servant; or (b) is an occupier of land outside a built-up urban area and the person— (i) takes the plant in the course of cultivating the plant on the land; or (ii) takes seeds from a plant growing on the land to cultivate the plant on the land; or (c) is an occupier of land and the plant— (i) is growing on the land; and (ii) was planted by the person; or (d) is an occupier of land in a built-up urban area and the plant is growing on the land; or (e) is an occupier of land outside a built-up urban area and the person takes the plant in the course of using the land for primary production in accordance with the purpose authorised by the lease; or.
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 143 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 109 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (f) is authorised to take the plant under a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals). Note 1 Built-up urban area—see s 139. Note 2 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (3) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 143 Offence—take native plant—special protection status (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes a plant; and (b) the plant— (i) is a native plant; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. Take—see s 126. (2) This section does not apply to a person if the person is— (a) a public servant exercising a function as a public servant; or (b) authorised to take the plant under a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals). Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58)..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 144 page 110 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 144 Offence—damage native tree—unleased land (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages a tree; and (b) the tree is— (i) a native tree; and (ii) on unleased land. Maximum penalty: 400 penalty units. Note Damage, a tree includes fell the tree—see s 139. Native tree—see s 139. (2) This section does not apply to a person if the person is— (a) a public servant exercising a function as a public servant; or (b) authorised to engage in the conduct constituting the offence under a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals). Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (3) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. (4) In addition to the penalty that may be imposed for an offence against this section, the court may order the defendant to— (a) make good the damage incurred; or (b) pay the Territory the cost of making good the damage..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 145 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 111 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) The Territory may enforce an order made under subsection (4) as if it were a judgment of the Magistrates Court in a civil proceeding. 145 Offence—damage native tree—leased land (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages a tree; and (b) the tree is— (i) a native tree; and (ii) on leased land outside a built-up urban area. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Built-up urban area—see s 139. Damage, a tree includes fell the tree—see s 139. Native tree—see s 139. (2) This section does not apply to a person if— (a) the tree was planted by an occupier of the land and damaged by an occupier of the land; or (b) the tree was damaged by an occupier of the land with the intention of using it on the land for a purpose other than sale; or Note Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). (c) the person has a reasonable excuse; or (d) the person is authorised to engage in the conduct constituting the offence under a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals). Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58)..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 146 page 112 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A person also has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 146 Offence—damage or take fallen native timber (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages fallen timber; and (b) the timber— (i) is native timber; and (ii) has a diameter of more than 10cm; and (iii) is on unleased land. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes fallen timber from land; and (b) the timber is native timber; and (c) the land is— (i) unleased land; or (ii) leased land outside a built-up urban area. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Built-up urban area—see s 139. Native timber—see s 139. Take—see s (7). (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person is— (a) a public servant exercising a function as a public servant; or.
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 147 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 113 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) authorised to engage in the conduct constituting the offence under a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals). Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. (5) In addition to the penalty that may be imposed for an offence against subsection (2), the court may order the defendant to— (a) make good the damage incurred; or (b) pay the Territory the cost of making good the damage. (6) The Territory may enforce an order made under subsection (5) as if it were a judgment of the Magistrates Court in a civil proceeding. (7) In this section: take means— (a) for timber on leased land—take the timber from the land subject to the lease; or (b) for timber on unleased land—take the timber from the immediate vicinity. 147 Offence—offer to sell native plant without disclosing licence (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person holds a nature conservation licence to sell a native plant; and (b) the person offers to sell the native plant; and.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 148 page 114 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the offer does not disclose— (i) that the person is licensed to sell the native plant; and (ii) the person’s licence number. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. 148 Offence—sell native plant—protected or special protection status (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person sells a plant; and (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) a protected native species. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Protected native species—see s 110. Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person sells a plant; and (b) the plant— (i) is a native plant; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 149 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 115 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 149 Offence—sell native plant without plant tag—protected or special protection status (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person sells a plant; and (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) a protected native species; and (c) the plant is not a seed or a dead plant; and (d) a plant tag is not visibly attached to the plant at the time of sale. Maximum penalty: 25 penalty units. Note Protected native species—see s 110. Sell includes offer for sale (see s 126). (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person sells a plant; and (b) the plant— (i) is a native plant; and (ii) has special protection status; and (c) the plant is not a seed or a dead plant; and (d) a plant tag is not visibly attached to the plant at the time of sale. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 150 page 116 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 150 Offence—import native plant—protected or special protection status (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person imports a plant into the ACT; and (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) a protected native species. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Protected native species—see s 110. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person imports a plant into the ACT; and (b) the plant— (i) is a native plant; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) This section does not apply to the importation of native timber into the ACT. Note 1 Native timber—see s 139. Note 2 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Native plants Division 6.1.3 Section 151 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 117 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 151 Offence—export native plant—protected or special protection status (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person exports a plant from the ACT; and (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) a protected native species. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. Note Protected native species—see s 110. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person exports a plant from the ACT; and (b) the plant— (i) is a native plant; and (ii) has special protection status. Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 6 exceptions are set out in s 153. 152 Offence—export plant without plant tag—protected or special protection status (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person exports a plant from the ACT; and.
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.3 Native plants Section 152 page 118 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) a protected native species; and (c) the plant is not a seed or a dead plant; and (d) a plant tag is not visibly attached to the plant at the time of export. Maximum penalty: 25 penalty units. Note Protected native species—see s 110. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person exports a plant from the ACT; and (b) the plant— (i) is a native plant; and (ii) has special protection status; and (c) the plant is not a seed or a dead plant; and (d) a plant tag is not visibly attached to the plant at the time of export. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Offences Part 6.1 Exceptions to offences Division 6.1.4 Section 153 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 119 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 6.1.4 Exceptions to offences 153 Chapter 6 exceptions (1) This section applies if a person has the benefit of the chapter 6 exceptions for an offence. (2) The offence does not apply to the person if— (a) the conduct constituting the offence is— (i) a restricted activity under an activities declaration and the person is complying with the directions and requirements stated in the declaration; or Note Activities declaration—see s 256. Restricted activity—see s 256. (ii) undertaken in accordance with a management agreement; or Note Management agreement—see s 310. (iii) undertaken in implementing a controlled native species management plan under section 167 (Controlled native species management plan—conservator etc to implement); or Note Controlled native species management plan—see s 158. (iv) undertaken in accordance with a cultural resource management plan; or Note Cultural resource management plan—see s 168A. (v) undertaken in accordance with a fisheries management plan; or Note Fisheries resource management plan—see the dictionary..
Chapter 6 Protection of native species—offences Part 6.1 Offences Division 6.1.4 Exceptions to offences Section 153 page 120 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the person is authorised to engage in the conduct constituting the offence under— (i) a nature conservation licence; or Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. (ii) a public unleased land permit; or (iii) a licence under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 303 (Decision on licence applications for unleased land); or (c) the person is a conservation officer exercising a function under this Act. Note 1 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). Note 2 This Act does not apply to emergency services personnel exercising functions under the Emergencies Act 2004 for the purpose of protecting life or property or controlling, extinguishing or preventing the spread of a fire (see s 7)..
Protection of native species—offences Chapter 6 Other matters Part 6.2 Section 154 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 121 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 6.2 Other matters 154 What is an exempt animal? In this Act: exempt animal means an animal for which an exempt animal declaration is in force. 155 Declarations—exempt animals (1) The conservator may declare a stated animal to be an exempt animal (an exempt animal declaration). Note Power to make a statutory instrument (including a regulation) includes power to make different provision for different categories (see Legislation Act, s 48). (2) In making an exempt animal declaration, the conservator must consider— (a) the need to protect native species in the ACT; and (b) the need to conserve the significant ecosystems of the ACT, New South Wales and Australia. (3) An exempt animal declaration is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 156 Interest in native animal ends with escape If a person holds an interest in a native animal and the animal escapes, the person’s interest in the animal ends. Note Also, if the person held a nature conservation licence to keep the escaped native animal, the licence no longer applies in relation to the animal (see s 276 (4))..
Chapter 7 Controlled native species management plans Section 157 page 122 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 7 Controlled native species management plans 157 What is a controlled native species?—ch 7 (1) In this chapter: controlled native species means a native species declared to be a controlled native species under subsection (2). (2) The Minister may declare a native species to be a controlled native species if satisfied that the species is having, or is likely to have, an unacceptable environmental, social or economic impact. Example—unacceptable social impact a threatened native species poses a serious threat to human health Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48). (3) A declaration is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 158 What is a controlled native species management plan? In this Act: controlled native species management plan, for a controlled native species, means a plan for the species on stated land, notified under section 165 (Draft controlled native species management plan—final version and notification). Note The power to make the plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Controlled native species management plans Chapter 7 Section 159 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 123 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 159 What is a draft controlled native species management plan?—ch 7 (1) In this chapter: draft controlled native species management plan, for a controlled native species on stated land— (a) means a draft plan detailing how the species may be appropriately managed on the stated land; and Examples—appropriate management 1 prohibiting the feeding of an animal species 2 prohibiting the propagation of a plant species 3 best practice in relation to management of the species (b) includes anything required to be included by a conservator guideline; and Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23. (c) may apply, adopt or incorporate an instrument as in force from time to time. Example—instrument that may be applied, adopted or incorporated a controlled native species management plan may incorporate requirements agreed to in a conservation agreement under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth) Note 1 The text of an applied, adopted or incorporated law or instrument, whether applied as in force from time to time or at a particular time, is taken to be a notifiable instrument if the operation of the Legislation Act, s 47 (5) or (6) is not disapplied (see s 47 (7)). Note 2 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (2) If a controlled native species management plan is inconsistent with an approved code of practice, or mandatory code of practice, under the Animal Welfare Act 1992, the code of practice prevails to the extent of the inconsistency..
Chapter 7 Controlled native species management plans Section 160 page 124 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 160 Draft controlled native species management plan— conservator to prepare The conservator may prepare a draft controlled native species management plan for a controlled native species on stated land. Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48). 161 Draft controlled native species management plan— consultation with lessee and custodian (1) In preparing a draft controlled native species management plan for a controlled native species on stated land, the conservator must consult the relevant person for the stated land if the plan requires the relevant person to do or not do something. (2) However, the conservator need not consult the relevant person in relation to something the person may do under the plan even though, if done, the thing must be done in the way stated in the plan. (3) In this section: relevant person, for stated land, means— (a) if the land is leased land—the lessee of the land; and (b) if the land is unleased land or public land—the custodian of the land. 162 Draft controlled native species management plan—public consultation (1) If the conservator prepares a draft controlled native species management plan, the conservator must also prepare a notice about the draft plan (a public consultation notice)..
Controlled native species management plans Chapter 7 Section 162 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 125 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A public consultation notice must— (a) state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft controlled native species management plan; and (ii) submissions may be given to the conservator only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) include the draft controlled native species management plan. (3) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the conservator notifies a public consultation notice for a draft controlled native species management plan— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft plan; and (b) the submission may be given to the conservator only during the public consultation period for the draft plan; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (5) The conservator may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the draft plan..
Chapter 7 Controlled native species management plans Section 163 page 126 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 163 Draft controlled native species management plan— revision If the public consultation period for a draft controlled native species management plan has ended, the conservator must— (a) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period; and (b) make any revisions to the plan that the conservator considers appropriate; and (c) prepare a final version of the plan. 164 Draft controlled native species management plan— emergencies (1) This section applies if the conservator— (a) is preparing a draft controlled native species management plan for a controlled native species; and (b) considers that the situation is an emergency. (2) The conservator— (a) need not comply with the consultation requirements in section 162 (Draft controlled native species management plan— public consultation); and (b) may prepare a final version of the draft controlled native species management plan. Note The final version of a draft controlled native species management plan is a controlled native species management plan and is a disallowable instrument (see s 165)..
Controlled native species management plans Chapter 7 Section 165 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 127 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 165 Draft controlled native species management plan—final version and notification (1) The final version of a draft controlled native species management plan prepared under section 163, section 164 or section 166 is a controlled native species management plan. (2) A controlled native species management plan is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a controlled native species management plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). 166 Controlled native species management plan—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) a controlled native species management plan for a controlled native species is in force (the existing plan); and (b) the conservator considers that minor amendments to the existing plan are appropriate. (2) The conservator— (a) may prepare a new draft controlled native species management plan for the controlled native species, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing plan; and (b) need not comply with the consultation requirements in section 162 (Draft controlled native species management plan— public consultation); and.
Chapter 7 Controlled native species management plans Section 167 page 128 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) may prepare a final version of the new draft controlled native species management plan, as amended. Note The final version of the new draft controlled native species management plan is a controlled native species management plan and is a disallowable instrument (see s 165). (3) In this section: minor amendment, of a controlled native species management plan, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the plan without changing the substance of the plan. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency 167 Controlled native species management plan— conservator etc to implement (1) If a controlled native species management plan is in force for a controlled native species on stated land, the following people must take reasonable steps to implement the plan: (a) the conservator; (b) if the land is unleased land or public land—the custodian of the land. (2) In implementing the plan, the conservator or the custodian may authorise another person to take action to implement the plan. Note 1 Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters (see Legislation Act, s 48). Note 2 The power to make an instrument includes the power to amend or repeal the instrument (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Controlled native species management plans Chapter 7 Section 168 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 129 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) An authorisation under subsection (2) must— (a) be in writing; and (b) state— (i) the authorised person; and (ii) the authorised action; and Example dispersing a camp of grey-headed flying foxes (iii) any conditions that apply to the action; and Example shooting of wildlife may only be done at night and in accordance with the animal welfare guidelines (iv) the period of time that the authorisation is in force. 168 Controlled native species management plan—monitoring and review (1) The conservator must monitor the effectiveness of a controlled native species management plan. (2) The conservator must review each controlled native species management plan at least once every 5 years..
Chapter 7A Cultural resource management plan Section 168A page 130 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 7A Cultural resource management plan 168A Meaning of cultural resource management plan In this Act: cultural resource management plan— (a) means a plan about access to land and resources for cultural use; and (b) includes anything required to be included by a conservator guideline; and Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23. (c) may apply, adopt or incorporate an instrument as in force from time to time. Example—instrument that may be applied, adopted or incorporated a fisheries management plan under the Fisheries Act 2000 Note The text of an applied, adopted or incorporated law or instrument, whether applied as in force from time to time or at a particular time, is taken to be a notifiable instrument if the operation of the Legislation Act, s 47 (5) or (6) is not disapplied (see s 47 (7)). 168B Preparation of draft cultural resource management plan (1) In preparing a draft cultural resource management plan that relates to an area of land, the conservator must— (a) develop the plan in partnership with any person who is a Ngunnawal traditional custodian; and (b) consult the United Ngunnawal Elders Council; and (c) consult the relevant person for the stated land; and (d) consider any relevant requirements under the territory plan..
Cultural resource management plan Chapter 7A Section 168C R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 131 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) In this section: relevant person, for land, means— (a) if the land is leased land—the lessee of the land; and (b) if the land is unleased land or public land—the custodian of the land. 168C Draft cultural resource management plan—revision and submission to Minister (1) If the conservator has completed consultation under section 168B for a draft cultural resource management plan, the conservator must— (a) consider any submissions received during the consultation; and (b) make any revisions to the draft plan that the conservator considers appropriate. (2) The conservator must then submit the plan to the Minister for approval. 168D Draft cultural resource management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject (1) If the conservator submits a cultural resource management plan to the Minister for approval, the Minister must— (a) approve the plan; or (b) return the plan to the conservator and direct the conservator to take 1 or more of the following actions in relation to it: (i) carry out stated further consultation; (ii) consider a relevant report; (iii) revise the plan in a stated way; or (c) reject the plan..
Chapter 7A Cultural resource management plan Section 168E page 132 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A cultural resource management plan approved by the Minister is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a cultural resource management plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). Note 3 Minor amendments may be made to the plan under s 168F. 168E Draft cultural resource management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc (1) This section applies if the Minister gives the conservator a direction under section 168D (1) (b). (2) The conservator must— (a) give effect to the direction; and (b) resubmit the draft plan to the Minister for approval. (3) The Minister must decide, under section 168C, what to do with the resubmitted draft plan. 168F Cultural resource management plan—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) a cultural resource management plan is in force (the existing plan); and (b) the conservator considers that minor amendments to the existing plan are appropriate. (2) The conservator— (a) may prepare a new draft cultural resource management plan, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing plan; and.
Cultural resource management plan Chapter 7A Section 168G R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 133 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) need not comply with the requirements in sections 168B to 168D; and (c) may make the cultural resource management plan, as amended. (3) An amended cultural resource management plan made by the conservator is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a cultural resource management plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). (4) In this section: minor amendment, of a cultural resource management plan, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the plan without changing the substance of the plan. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency 168G Cultural resource management plan—conservator to implement (1) If a cultural resource management plan is in force, the conservator must take reasonable steps to implement the plan. (2) In implementing the plan, the conservator may authorise another person to take action to implement the plan..
Chapter 7A Cultural resource management plan Section 168H page 134 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 168H Cultural resource management plan—reporting (1) The conservator must report to the Minister about the cultural resource management plan at least once every 5 years. (2) The Minister must consider the report and may take any action the Minister considers appropriate. (3) The Minister may make the report publicly accessible not later than 30 days after the day the conservator gives the report to the Minister. Example—publicly accessible published on the directorate website 168I Cultural resource management plan—review (1) The conservator must review the cultural resource management plan on request from— (a) the Human Rights Commissioner; or (b) the Minister. (2) In conducting the review, the conservator must consult with the following in relation to any land mentioned in the plan: (a) any person who is a Ngunnawal traditional custodian; (b) a relevant person under section 168B. (3) After completing the review, the conservator— (a) must report to the Minister about the review; and (b) may provide the Minister with a recommendation regarding the plan. (4) A recommendation must be accompanied by a report setting out any issues raised under the review. (5) If the conservator makes a recommendation to the Minister, the Minister must respond to the conservator about the recommendation..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Definitions Part 8.1 Section 169 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 135 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.1 Definitions 169 What is a reserve?—Act (1) In this Act: reserve— (a) means— (i) a wilderness area; and (ii) a national park; and (iii) a nature reserve; and (iv) a catchment area; and (b) includes any other area of public land that is— (i) reserved in the territory plan under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 315 (Reserved areas— public land); and (ii) prescribed by regulation to be a reserve; but (c) does not include an area prescribed by regulation as excluded from a reserve. (2) In this section: catchment area means an area of public land reserved in the territory plan for the protection of water supply under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 315 (g). national park means an area of public land reserved in the territory plan for a national park under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 315 (b)..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.1 Definitions Section 170 page 136 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au nature reserve means an area of public land reserved in the territory plan for a nature reserve under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 315 (c). 170 What is a wilderness area?—Act In this Act: wilderness area means an area of public land reserved in the territory plan for a wilderness area under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 315 (a)..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 IUCN categories for reserves Part 8.2 Section 171 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 137 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 8.2 IUCN categories for reserves Note IUCN refers to the International Union for Conservation of Nature. 171 What is an IUCN category for a reserve?—pt 8.2 In this part: IUCN category—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), section 346 (1) (Content of Proclamation declaring Commonwealth reserve). 172 Assignment of reserves to IUCN categories (1) The conservator may assign a reserve to an IUCN category. (2) The conservator may divide a reserve into parts (zones) and assign each zone to an IUCN category. (3) Before the conservator assigns a reserve or zone to an IUCN category, the conservator must— (a) be satisfied that the reserve or zone— (i) has the characteristics (if any) prescribed by regulation for the category; and (ii) meets the criteria (if any) prescribed by regulation for the category; and (iii) will be managed in accordance with the IUCN reserve management objectives for the category; and (b) consult the custodian of the reserve. (4) An assignment of a reserve or zone to an IUCN category is a notifiable instrument. Note 1 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make an instrument includes the power to amend or repeal the instrument (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.2 IUCN categories for reserves Section 173 page 138 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 173 IUCN reserve management objectives A regulation may prescribe objectives for each IUCN category (the IUCN reserve management objectives). 174 Management of reserve assigned to IUCN category if no reserve management plan (1) This section applies if— (a) there is no reserve management plan in force for a reserve; but (b) the reserve, or a zone of the reserve, has been assigned by the conservator to an IUCN category. (2) If the reserve has been assigned to an IUCN category, the custodian of the reserve must manage the reserve in accordance with the IUCN reserve management objectives for the IUCN category to which the reserve is assigned. (3) If a zone of the reserve has been assigned to an IUCN category, the custodian of the zone must manage the zone in accordance with the IUCN reserve management objectives for the IUCN category to which the zone is assigned. Note The land must also be managed in accordance with the management objectives for the land and any management plan for the land (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 316)..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Reserve management plans Part 8.3 Section 175 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 139 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 8.3 Reserve management plans Note Under the Planning and Development Act 2007, s 316 (b), each area of public land identified in the territory plan must be managed in accordance with the public land management plan for the area. If the area is a reserve, the public land management plan is a reserve management plan for the area under this part (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 318 (1) (a)). 175 What is a reserve management plan? In this Act: reserve management plan, for a reserve— (a) means a plan for the reserve, notified under section 184 (Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s approval and notification); and (b) if the reserve includes a Ramsar wetland—includes a Ramsar wetlands management plan for the wetland. Note 1 Ramsar wetland—see s 190. Ramsar wetland management plan, for a Ramsar wetland—see s 191. Note 2 The power to make a plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). 176 What is a draft reserve management plan?—pt 8.3 In this part: draft reserve management plan, for a reserve, means a draft management plan for the reserve that— (a) identifies the reserve; and.
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.3 Reserve management plans Section 177 page 140 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) describes how the planning and development management objectives for the reserve are to be implemented or promoted in the reserve; and Note Planning and development management objectives—see the dictionary. (c) for a reserve or zone that is assigned to an IUCN category— (i) is consistent with the IUCN reserve management objectives for the category; and (ii) describes how the IUCN reserve management objectives for the reserve are to be implemented or promoted in the reserve or zone. Note IUCN category, for a reserve—see s 171. IUCN reserve management objectives—see s 173. 177 Draft reserve management plan—custodian to prepare (1) The custodian of a reserve must prepare a draft reserve management plan for the reserve. Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48). (2) In preparing a draft reserve management plan, the custodian must consult— (a) the conservator; and (b) the planning and land authority. 179 Draft reserve management plan—public consultation (1) If the custodian of a reserve prepares a draft reserve management plan for the reserve, the custodian must also prepare a notice about the draft reserve management plan (a public consultation notice). (2) A public consultation notice must—.
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Reserve management plans Part 8.3 Section 180 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 141 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (a) state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the custodian of the reserve about the draft reserve management plan; and (ii) submissions may be given to the custodian only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) include the draft reserve management plan. (3) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the custodian of a reserve notifies a public consultation notice for a draft reserve management plan— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the custodian about the draft plan; and (b) the submission may be given to the custodian only during the public consultation period for the draft plan; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (5) The custodian may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the draft plan. 180 Draft reserve management plan—revision and submission to Minister (1) If the public consultation period for a draft reserve management plan has ended, the custodian of the reserve must— (a) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period; and.
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.3 Reserve management plans Section 181 page 142 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) make any revisions to the draft plan that the custodian considers appropriate. (2) The custodian of the reserve must then submit the draft plan to the Minister for approval. (3) The submission must be accompanied by a report— (a) setting out the issues raised in any submissions given to the custodian during the public consultation period for the draft plan; and (b) if the conservator or the planning and land authority made a submission during the public consultation period recommending a change to the draft plan and the custodian did not revise the draft plan to incorporate the change—explaining why the custodian did not make the recommended change. 181 Draft reserve management plan—referral to Legislative Assembly committee (1) This section applies if the custodian of a reserve submits a draft reserve management plan to the Minister for approval. (2) The Minister must, not later than 5 working days after the day the Minister receives the draft plan, refer the following to an appropriate committee of the Legislative Assembly: (a) the draft plan; (b) the report mentioned in section 180 (3). (3) The committee must consider the draft plan and report and either— (a) recommend that the Minister approves the draft plan; or (b) make another recommendation about the draft plan. (4) The committee must tell the Minister about the recommendation and refer the matter back to the Minister..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Reserve management plans Part 8.3 Section 182 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 143 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 182 Draft reserve management plan—committee to report (1) This section applies if the Minister has referred a draft plan to a committee of the Legislative Assembly under section 181. (2) The Minister must not take action under section 183 in relation to the draft plan until— (a) the committee has referred the draft plan back to the Minister under section 181 (4); or (b) 6 months after the day the draft plan was given to the committee. (3) If the committee has not referred the draft plan back to the Minister 6 months after the day the draft plan was given to the committee, the Minister may take action under section 183 in relation to the draft plan. (4) After the committee refers the draft plan back to the Minister, the Minister must take action under section 183 in relation to the draft plan. 183 Draft reserve management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject (1) This section applies if— (a) a Legislative Assembly committee refers a draft plan back to the Minister under section 181 (4); or (b) the Minister may take action under section 182 (3); or (c) a custodian resubmits a draft plan to the Minister under section 185 (Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc). (2) If the Legislative Assembly committee has made a recommendation about the draft plan, the Minister must consider the recommendation. (3) The Minister must, not later than the required time— (a) approve the draft plan; or.
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.3 Reserve management plans Section 183 page 144 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) return the draft plan to the custodian and direct the custodian to take 1 or more of the following actions in relation to it: (i) if the Legislative Assembly committee has made a recommendation about the draft plan—consider the recommendation; (ii) carry out stated further consultation; (iii) consider a revision suggested by the Minister; (iv) revise the draft plan in a stated way; or (c) reject the draft plan. (4) In this section: required time means 45 working days after— (a) if subsection (1) (a) applies—the day the committee tells the Minister about the recommendation under section 181 (4); or (b) if subsection (1) (b) applies—the end of the 6-month period mentioned in section 182 (3); or (c) if subsection (1) (c) applies—the day the custodian resubmits the plan to the Minister..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Reserve management plans Part 8.3 Section 184 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 145 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 184 Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s approval and notification (1) A draft reserve management plan approved by the Minister under section 183 (3) (a) or section 187 (3) (a) is a reserve management plan. (2) A reserve management plan is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a reserve management plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). Note 3 Minor amendments may be made to the plan under s 187. 185 Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc (1) This section applies if the Minister gives the custodian of a reserve a direction under section 183 (3) (b). (2) The custodian must— (a) give effect to the direction; and (b) resubmit the draft plan to the Minister for approval. (3) The Minister must decide, under section 183, what to do with the resubmitted draft plan. 186 Draft reserve management plan—Minister’s rejection (1) If the Minister rejects a draft reserve management plan under section 183 (3) (c), the Minister must prepare a notice stating that the draft plan is rejected (a rejection notice). (2) A rejection notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.3 Reserve management plans Section 187 page 146 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 187 Reserve management plan—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) a reserve management plan for a reserve is in force (the existing plan); and (b) the custodian considers that minor amendments to the existing plan are appropriate. (2) The custodian— (a) may prepare a new draft reserve management plan for the reserve, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing plan; and (b) need not comply with the requirements in this part; and (c) may submit the new draft reserve management plan to the Minister for approval. (3) If the custodian submits a new draft reserve management plan to the Minister for approval, the Minister must— (a) approve the plan; or (b) reject the plan. Note The new draft reserve management plan approved by the Minister is a reserve management plan and is a disallowable instrument (see s 184). (4) In this section: minor amendment, of a reserve management plan for a reserve, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the plan without changing the substance of the plan. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency.
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Reserve management plans Part 8.3 Section 188 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 147 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 188 Reserve management plan—custodian to implement If a reserve management plan is in force for a reserve, the custodian of the reserve must take reasonable steps to implement the plan. 189 Reserve management plan—review (1) This section applies if a reserve management plan is in force for a reserve. (2) The custodian of the reserve must report to the Minister about the implementation of the plan at least once every 5 years. (3) The custodian of the reserve must review the plan— (a) every 10 years after the plan commences; and (b) at any other time at the Minister’s request. (4) However, the Minister may extend the time for conducting a review under subsection (3) (a). (5) In carrying out a review, the custodian of the reserve must— (a) undertake public consultation in accordance with section 179 (Draft reserve management plan—public consultation) as if a reference to a draft reserve management plan were a reference to the reserve management plan under review; and (b) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.4 Ramsar wetlands management plans Section 190 page 148 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 8.4 Ramsar wetlands management plans Note Ramsar wetlands are wetlands of international importance. 190 What is a Ramsar wetland? (1) In this Act: Ramsar wetland means a declared Ramsar wetland. (2) In this section: declared Ramsar wetland—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), section 17 (What is a declared Ramsar wetland?). 191 What is a Ramsar wetland management plan? In this Act: Ramsar wetland management plan, for a Ramsar wetland, means a plan for the wetland notified under section 198 (Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s approval and notification). 192 What is a draft Ramsar wetland management plan?—pt 8.4 (1) In this part: draft Ramsar wetland management plan, for a Ramsar wetland— (a) means a draft plan detailing how the Ramsar wetland, and its surrounding area, is to be managed to preserve and protect the ecological character of the Ramsar wetland; and Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48)..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Ramsar wetlands management plans Part 8.4 Section 193 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 149 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) includes anything required to be included by a conservator guideline; and Note Conservator guidelines—see s 23. (c) may apply, adopt or incorporate an instrument as in force from time to time. Note 1 The text of an applied, adopted or incorporated law or instrument, whether applied as in force from time to time or at a particular time, is taken to be a notifiable instrument if the operation of the Legislation Act, s 47 (5) or (6) is not disapplied (see s 47 (7)). Note 2 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (2) In this section: ecological character—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), section 16 (3) (Requirement for approval of activities with a significant impact on a declared Ramsar wetland). 193 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—conservator to prepare The conservator may prepare a draft Ramsar wetland management plan for a Ramsar wetland. 194 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—consultation with Commonwealth and custodian In preparing a draft Ramsar wetland management plan, the conservator must consult— (a) the Commonwealth Minister responsible for administering the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth); and (b) if the Ramsar wetland is located on unleased land or public land—the custodian of each area of land where the wetland is located..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.4 Ramsar wetlands management plans Section 195 page 150 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 195 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—public consultation (1) If the conservator prepares a draft Ramsar wetland management plan, the conservator must also prepare a notice about the draft Ramsar wetland management plan (a public consultation notice). (2) A public consultation notice must— (a) state that— (i) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft Ramsar wetland management plan; and (ii) submissions may be given to the conservator only during the period starting on the day the public consultation notice is notified under the Legislation Act and ending on a stated day, being a day at least 6 weeks after the day it is notified (the public consultation period); and (b) include the draft Ramsar wetland management plan. (3) A public consultation notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the conservator notifies a public consultation notice for a draft Ramsar wetland management plan— (a) anyone may give a written submission to the conservator about the draft plan; and (b) the submission may be given to the conservator only during the public consultation period for the draft plan; and (c) the person making the submission may, in writing, withdraw the submission at any time. (5) The conservator may make arrangements for people with particular communication needs to ensure they have adequate opportunity to comment on the draft plan..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Ramsar wetlands management plans Part 8.4 Section 196 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 151 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 196 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—revision and submission to Minister (1) If the public consultation period for a draft Ramsar wetland management plan has ended, the conservator must— (a) consider any submissions received during the public consultation period; and (b) make any revisions to the draft plan that the conservator considers appropriate. (2) The conservator must then submit the draft plan to the Minister for approval. (3) The submission must be accompanied by a report setting out the issues raised in any submissions given to the conservator during the public consultation period for the draft plan. 197 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject If the conservator submits a draft Ramsar wetland management plan to the Minister for approval, the Minister must, not later than 45 days after receiving the submission— (a) approve the draft plan; or (b) return the draft plan to the conservator and direct the conservator to take 1 or more of the following actions in relation to it: (i) carry out stated further consultation; (ii) consider a relevant report; (iii) revise the draft plan in a stated way; or (c) reject the draft plan..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.4 Ramsar wetlands management plans Section 198 page 152 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 198 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s approval and notification (1) A draft Ramsar wetland management plan approved by the Minister under section 197 (a) or section 201 (3) is a Ramsar wetland management plan. (2) A Ramsar wetland management plan is a disallowable instrument. Note 1 A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. Note 2 The power to make a Ramsar wetland management plan includes the power to amend or repeal the plan. The power to amend or repeal the plan is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the plan (see Legislation Act, s 46). Note 3 Minor amendments may be made to the Ramsar wetland management plan under s 201. 199 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc (1) This section applies if the Minister gives the conservator a direction under section 197 (b). (2) The conservator must— (a) give effect to the direction; and (b) resubmit the draft plan to the Minister for approval. (3) The Minister must decide, under section 197, what to do with the resubmitted draft plan..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Ramsar wetlands management plans Part 8.4 Section 200 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 153 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 200 Draft Ramsar wetland management plan—Minister’s rejection (1) If the Minister rejects a draft nature conservation Ramsar wetland management plan under section 197 (c), the Minister must prepare a notice stating that the draft plan is rejected (a rejection notice). (2) A rejection notice is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. 201 Ramsar wetland management plan—minor amendments (1) This section applies if— (a) a Ramsar wetland management plan for a Ramsar wetland is in force (the existing plan); and (b) the conservator considers that minor amendments to the existing plan are appropriate. (2) The conservator— (a) may prepare a new draft Ramsar wetland management plan for the wetland, incorporating the minor amendments into the existing plan; and (b) need not comply with the requirements in this part; and (c) may submit the new draft Ramsar wetland management plan to the Minister for approval. (3) If the conservator submits a new draft Ramsar wetland management plan to the Minister for approval, the Minister must— (a) approve the plan; or (b) reject the plan. Note The new draft Ramsar wetland management plan approved by the Minister is a Ramsar wetland management plan and is a disallowable instrument (see s 198)..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.4 Ramsar wetlands management plans Section 202 page 154 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) In this section: minor amendment, of a Ramsar wetland management plan, means an amendment that will improve the effectiveness or technical efficiency of the plan without changing the substance of the plan. Examples 1 minor correction to improve effectiveness 2 omission of something redundant 3 technical adjustment to improve efficiency 202 Ramsar wetland management plan—conservator etc to implement If a Ramsar wetland management plan is in force for a Ramsar wetland, the following people must take reasonable steps to implement the plan: (a) the conservator; (b) if the Ramsar wetland is located on unleased land or public land—the custodian of each area of land where the wetland is located. 203 Ramsar wetland management plan—monitoring and review (1) The conservator must monitor the effectiveness of a Ramsar wetland management plan. (2) The conservator must report to the Minister about each Ramsar wetland management plan at least once every 7 years..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Access to biological resources in reserves Part 8.5 Section 204 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 155 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 8.5 Access to biological resources in reserves 204 What are biological resources?—pt 8.5 In this part: biological resources includes— (a) genetic resources; and (b) organisms or parts of organisms; and (c) populations of species or ecological communities; and (d) any other biotic component of an ecosystem with actual or potential use or value for humanity. 205 What are genetic resources?—pt 8.5 In this part: genetic resources means— (a) any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin that contains functional units of heredity; and (b) has actual or potential value for humanity. 206 Who is an access provider?—pt 8.5 In this part: access provider, for biological resources in a reserve means— (a) the Territory; and (b) if native title exists in relation to the reserve—the native title holders for the reserve..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.5 Access to biological resources in reserves Section 207 page 156 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 207 What is accessing biological resources?—pt 8.5 (1) In this part: accessing biological resources— (a) means taking biological resources of native species for research and development on any genetic resources, or biochemical compounds, comprising or contained in the biological resources; but Examples 1 collecting living material for taxonomic research 2 analysing and sampling stored material for potential commercial product development (b) does not include the following activities: (i) Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander people taking biological resources— (A) for a purpose other than a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a); and (B) in the exercise of their native title rights and interests; (ii) accessing human remains; (iii) taking biological resources that have been cultivated or tended for a purpose other than a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a); (iv) taking public resources for a purpose other than a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a); (v) taking a biological resource that is a genetically modified organism; (vi) accessing biological resources mentioned in a declaration under section 208..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Access to biological resources in reserves Part 8.5 Section 208 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 157 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A person is taken to have access to biological resources if there is a reasonable prospect that biological resources taken by the person will be subject to research and development on any genetic resources, or biochemical compounds, comprising or contained in the biological resources. (3) In this section: genetically modified organism—see the Gene Technology Act 2003, dictionary. taking public resources includes the following activities: (a) fishing for commerce or recreation; (b) collecting broodstock for aquaculture; (c) harvesting wildflowers; (d) taking wild animals or plants for food; (e) collecting peat or firewood; (f) taking essential oils from wild plants; (g) collecting plant reproductive material for propagation; (h) commercial forestry. 208 Application—certain biological resources (1) The conservator may declare that this part does not apply to stated biological resources or a stated collection of biological resources (including future additions to the collection) if— (a) the resources are held as specimens away from their natural environment by the Territory or a territory authority and the conservator has reasonable grounds to believe that access to the resources is in a way that is consistent with this part; or.
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.5 Access to biological resources in reserves Section 209 page 158 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the conservator has reasonable grounds to believe that— (i) access to the resources is under a law in force in the Territory; or (ii) access to the resources is under a law (other than a Commonwealth law) in force in a State and, if the declaration is made, access to the resources would be in a way that is consistent with this part; or (c) use of the resources is required to be controlled under any international agreement to which Australia is a party. Example—international agreement to which Australia is a party the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture Note State includes the Northern Territory (see Legislation Act, dict, pt 1). (2) A person may ask the conservator to make a declaration. (3) A declaration may be subject to conditions. (4) A declaration is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. 209 Offence—access biological resources (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person accesses biological resources; and (b) the biological resources are in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if— (a) the person holds a nature conservation licence authorising the access to the biological resources; or Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262..
Reserves—management planning Chapter 8 Access to biological resources in reserves Part 8.5 Section 210 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 159 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the person is an access provider for the biological resources. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 210 Benefit-sharing agreement—licensee required to enter (1) An applicant for a nature conservation licence to access biological resources for commercial purposes in a reserve must enter into a benefit-sharing agreement with each access provider for the resources to enable the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the use of the resources. Note The conservator may make a model benefit-sharing agreement as a guide (see s 211 (2)). (2) The conservator may, on behalf of the Territory as an access provider, enter into the benefit-sharing agreement. (3) A benefit-sharing agreement takes effect only if a nature conservation licence for the proposed access is issued under chapter 11 (Nature conservation licences). 211 Benefit-sharing agreement—provisions (1) A benefit-sharing agreement must provide for reasonable benefit-sharing arrangements, including protection for, recognition of and valuing of any Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander people’s knowledge to be used. (2) The conservator may make a model benefit-sharing agreement as a guide for applicants. (3) A model benefit-sharing agreement is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act..
Chapter 8 Reserves—management planning Part 8.5 Access to biological resources in reserves Section 212 page 160 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 212 Benefit-sharing agreement—informed consent (1) The conservator must not enter into a benefit-sharing agreement on behalf of the Territory concerning access to biological resources for which a native title holder is an access provider unless the conservator is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the access provider has given informed consent to the benefit-sharing agreement. (2) In considering whether an access provider has given informed consent to a benefit-sharing agreement, the conservator must consider the following matters: (a) whether the access provider had adequate knowledge of this part and was able to engage in reasonable negotiations with the applicant for the nature conservation licence about the benefit-sharing agreement; (b) whether the access provider was given adequate time— (i) to consider the application for the nature conservation licence (including time to consult relevant people); and (ii) to negotiate the benefit-sharing agreement; (c) whether the views of any representative Aboriginal body or any other body performing the functions of a representative body for the reserve have been sought; (d) whether the access provider has received independent legal advice about the application and the requirements of this part..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences generally Part 9.1 Section 213 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 161 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.1 Reserves—offences generally 213 Offence—enter reserve without paying entry fee (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the Minister has determined an entry fee for a reserve; and Note An entry fee may be determined under s 368 for this provision. (b) a conservation officer asks the person to pay the entry fee for the reserve; and (c) the person fails to pay the entry fee; and (d) the person enters the reserve. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. 214 Offence—take animal into reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person— (i) takes an animal into a reserve; or (ii) allows an animal to enter a reserve; and (b) the animal is not a native animal. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. Note A person does not commit an offence only because the person is accompanied by an assistance animal and takes the animal into a reserve (see Domestic Animals Act 2000, s 106C)..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.1 Reserves—offences generally Section 215 page 162 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 215 Offence—feed native animal in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person feeds an animal in a reserve; and (b) the animal is a native animal. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 216 Offence—interfere with trap or bait in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) interferes with a trap or bait; and (b) the trap or bait is in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. Note Reserve—see s 169. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences generally Part 9.1 Section 217 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 163 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 217 Offence—weapons and traps in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if the person possesses or uses, in a reserve— (a) a firearm; or (b) a spear, spear gun, bow or arrow; or (c) a trap, net, snare or other device designed, or capable of being used, to take or capture an animal; or (d) a substance that is capable of being used to take or capture an animal. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person only because— (a) the person possesses or uses a landing net; and (b) the possession or use is for landing a fish that is already hooked. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. (5) In this section: firearm—see the Firearms Act 1996, section 6. landing net means a net consisting of a hoop or ring that is attached to netting or other soft material and which is to be used for the purpose of landing a fish that is already hooked..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.1 Reserves—offences generally Section 218 page 164 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 218 Offence—damage native plant in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person engages in conduct; and (b) the conduct causes damage to a plant; and (c) the plant is— (i) a native plant; and (ii) in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Reserve—see s 169. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 219 Offence—take plant or plant reproductive material into reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person takes a plant into a reserve; and (b) the plant is a pest plant. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) takes plant reproductive material into a reserve; and (b) leaves the plant reproductive material in the reserve. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences generally Part 9.1 Section 220 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 165 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 220 Offence—planting a plant in a reserve (1) A person commits an offence if the person plants a plant in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 221 Offence—remove soil or stone from reserve (1) A person commits an offence if the person removes soil or stone from a reserve. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. Note Reserve—see s 169. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 222 Offence—damage, destroy or remove things in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages or destroys— (i) a natural or constructed structure or feature; or (ii) infrastructure; and.
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.1 Reserves—offences generally Section 222 page 166 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the structure, feature or infrastructure is in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note If a person damages territory property in a reserve, the director-general may direct the person to repair the damage. Failure to comply with the direction is an offence (see Public Unleased Land Act 2013, s 21 and s 22). (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages or destroys a site or object; and (b) the site or object is— (i) of historical, archaeological, palaeontological or geological interest; and (ii) in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (3) A person commits an offence if the person removes infrastructure from a reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (4) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person removes an object from a reserve; and (b) the object is of historical, archaeological, palaeontological or geological interest. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (5) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (6) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences generally Part 9.1 Section 222 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 167 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (7) In this section: infrastructure, in a reserve means the buildings, roads, items and equipment associated with managing the reserve. Examples—infrastructure in a reserve roads, fences, gates, signs, taps, garbage bins, toilets, visitors centre.
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.2 Reserves—offences in wilderness areas Section 223 page 168 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 9.2 Reserves—offences in wilderness areas 223 Offence—make road in wilderness area (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) makes a track or road; and (b) the track or road is in a wilderness area. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. 224 Offence—use motor vehicle off road in wilderness area (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person uses a motor vehicle in a wilderness area; and (b) the motor vehicle is used outside a track or road that— (i) is designed to be used by vehicles with 4 or more wheels; and (ii) was in existence when the wilderness area was reserved in the territory plan. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. 225 Offence—excavate in wilderness area without licence (1) A person commits an offence if the person excavates in a wilderness area. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences in wilderness areas Part 9.2 Section 226 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 169 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person holds a nature conservation licence authorising the excavation. Note 1 Nature conservation licence—see s 262. Note 2 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 226 Direction to restore excavation site (1) This section applies if a person— (a) excavates in a wilderness area; and (b) when the excavation is finished, fails to restore the excavation site and its surroundings as far as possible to their former state. (2) The conservator may direct the person to restore the site and surroundings as far as possible to their former state (a restore excavation direction). (3) A restore excavation direction must be in writing and state— (a) the wilderness area; and (b) the excavation site and surroundings; and (c) the former state of the site and surroundings; and (d) when the direction must be complied with, being a day at least 1 month after the direction is given to the person. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.2 Reserves—offences in wilderness areas Section 227 page 170 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 227 Offence—fail to comply with restore excavation direction (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a restore excavation direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person takes reasonable steps to restore the excavation site and its surroundings as far as possible to their former state. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 228 Restoration of excavation site by Territory (1) This section applies if a person— (a) is subject to a restore excavation direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. (2) The conservator may— (a) restore the site and surroundings; and (b) recover from the person the reasonable costs of restoring the site and surroundings. Note An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177)..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—repairing damage Part 9.3 Section 229 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 171 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 9.3 Reserves—repairing damage 229 Directions to repair damage to reserve (1) This section applies if— (a) a person causes damage to— (i) a reserve; or (ii) Territory property on a reserve; and Examples • fence • visitor facilities (b) the damage is not authorised under a nature conservation licence. Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. (2) The conservator may direct the person to repair the damage (a repair damage direction). (3) A repair damage direction must be in writing and state— (a) the reserve and Territory property (if any); and (b) the damage to be repaired; and (c) when the direction must be complied with, being a day at least 1 month after the direction is given to the person. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.3 Reserves—repairing damage Section 230 page 172 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 230 Offence—fail to comply with repair damage direction (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a repair damage direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person takes reasonable steps to repair the damage. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 231 Repair of damage by Territory (1) This section applies if a person— (a) is subject to a repair damage direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. (2) The conservator may— (a) repair the damage; and (b) recover from the person the reasonable costs of repairing the damage. Note An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177)..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Part 9.4 Section 232 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 173 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 9.4 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation 232 What is native vegetation?—pt 9.4 In this part: native vegetation, for an area, means any of the following kinds of vegetation indigenous to the area: (a) trees; (b) understorey plants; (c) groundcover consisting of any kind of grass or herbaceous vegetation; (d) plants occurring in a wetland or stream in the area. 233 What is a native vegetation area?—pt 9.4 In this part: native vegetation area, means an area where— (a) either— (i) 10% or more of the area is covered with vegetation (whether dead or alive); and (ii) no more than 60% of the ground layer vegetation cover is exotic annual (at any time of year); and (iii) more than 50% of the perennial ground layer vegetation cover is native vegetation; or (b) trees or shrubs indigenous to the area have a canopy cover of 10% or more in any stratum over the area..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.4 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Section 234 page 174 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 234 What is clearing native vegetation?—pt 9.4 In this part: clearing native vegetation includes— (a) cutting down, felling, thinning, logging or removing native vegetation; and (b) burning native vegetation; and (c) doing anything else that kills, or is likely to kill, native vegetation. 235 When does clearing native vegetation cause serious harm or material harm to a reserve?—pt 9.4 In this part: cause, serious harm or material harm, means substantially contribute directly or indirectly to the harm. material harm—clearing native vegetation in a reserve causes material harm to the reserve if— (a) it happens in a wetland, other than a Ramsar wetland, in the reserve; or Note Ramsar wetland—see s 190. (b) the total area cleared of native vegetation is more than 0.2ha but not more than 2ha; or (c) the cost of action needed to restore native vegetation to the area cleared is within the range of $5 000 to $50 000. serious harm—clearing native vegetation in a reserve causes serious harm to the reserve if— (a) it causes the loss of, or the loss of part of— (i) a critically endangered ecological community in the reserve; or.
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Part 9.4 Section 236 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 175 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) an endangered ecological community in the reserve; or (iii) a vulnerable ecological community in the reserve; or Note Critically endangered, endangered and vulnerable ecological communities are threatened ecological communities—see s 69. (b) it causes a substantial loss of habitat of native plants or native animals in the reserve; or (c) it happens in a Ramsar wetland in the reserve; or Note Ramsar wetland—see s 190. (d) the total area cleared of native vegetation in the reserve is more than 2ha; or (e) the cost of action needed to restore native vegetation to the area cleared in the reserve is more than $50 000. 236 Offence—clear vegetation causing serious harm (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve; and (c) the clearing causes serious harm to the reserve; and (d) the person knows that— (i) the vegetation is native vegetation; and (ii) the area cleared is in a reserve; and (iii) the clearing causes serious harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 2 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 7 years or both..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.4 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Section 236 page 176 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve; and (c) the clearing causes serious harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is reckless about whether— (i) the vegetation is native vegetation; and (ii) the area cleared is in a reserve; and (iii) the clearing causes serious harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 2 000 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both. (3) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve; and (c) the clearing causes serious harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is negligent about whether— (i) the vegetation is native vegetation; and (ii) the area cleared is in a reserve; and (iii) the clearing causes serious harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 1 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 3 years or both. (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Part 9.4 Section 237 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 177 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 237 Offence—clear vegetation causing material harm (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve; and (c) the clearing causes material harm to the reserve; and (d) the person knows that— (i) the vegetation is native vegetation; and (ii) the area cleared is in a reserve; and (iii) the clearing causes material harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 1 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve; and (c) the clearing causes material harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is reckless about whether— (i) the vegetation is native vegetation; and (ii) the area cleared is in a reserve; and (iii) the clearing causes material harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 1 000 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.4 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Section 238 page 178 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve; and (c) the clearing causes material harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is negligent about whether— (i) the vegetation is native vegetation; and (ii) the area cleared is in a reserve; and (iii) the clearing causes material harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 750 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 238 Offence—clear vegetation (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person clears native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and (b) the native vegetation area is in a reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Part 9.4 Section 239 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 179 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this section if the defendant proves that the defendant took all reasonable steps to avoid committing the offence. Note The defendant has a legal burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 59). 239 Defence of appropriate diligence for offences—pt 9.4 It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this part if the defendant proves that the defendant took all reasonable precautions and exercised all appropriate diligence to prevent the commission of the offence. 240 Alternative verdicts for offences—pt 9.4 (1) This section applies if, in a prosecution for a relevant offence, the trier of fact— (a) is not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty of the relevant offence; but (b) is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty of an alternative offence. (2) The trier of fact may find the defendant guilty of the alternative offence, but only if the defendant has been given procedural fairness in relation to that finding of guilt. (3) In this section: alternative offence, for a relevant offence, means an offence mentioned in table 240, column 3, for the offence. relevant offence means an offence mentioned in table 240, column 2..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.4 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Section 241 page 180 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Table 240 Alternative verdicts for offences—pt 9.4 column 1 item column 2 relevant offence column 3 alternative offence 1 s 236 (1) (knowingly clear vegetation—serious harm) s 236 (2) (recklessly clear vegetation—serious harm) s 236 (3) (negligently clear vegetation—serious harm) 2 s 236 (2) (recklessly clear vegetation—serious harm) s 236 (3) (negligently clear vegetation—serious harm) 3 s 237 (1) (knowingly clear vegetation—material harm) s 237 (2) (recklessly clear vegetation—material harm) s 237 (3) (negligently clear vegetation—material harm) 4 s 237 (2) (recklessly clear vegetation—material harm) s 237 (3) (negligently clear vegetation—material harm) 241 Order to restore cleared vegetation etc (1) This section applies if a court convicts a person, or finds a person guilty, of an offence against this part. (2) The court may order the person to— (a) take any action the court considers appropriate, including action to— (i) mitigate the effect of the clearing; or (ii) restore native vegetation in the area cleared; or (b) pay an amount to the Territory for reasonable costs incurred, or to be incurred, by the Territory in taking action— (i) mentioned in paragraph (a); or (ii) to monitor the outcome of action ordered under paragraph (a). (3) The court may also order the person to provide security for the performance of any obligation under the order..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation Part 9.4 Section 242 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 181 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) The court may take action under this section— (a) on its own initiative or on the application of the conservator; and (b) in addition to, or instead of, any other penalty it may impose for the offence. 242 Order to publicise conviction or finding of guilt—pt 9.4 (1) This section applies if a court convicts a person, or finds a person guilty, of an offence against this part. (2) The court may order the person to take stated action to publicise— (a) the conviction or finding of guilt; and (b) the environmental and other consequences of the offence; and (c) any order made by the court under section 241 (2) (a); and (d) any action taken by the person— (i) to mitigate the effect of the clearing; or (ii) to restore native vegetation in the area cleared. (3) The court may take action under this section— (a) on its own initiative or on the application of the conservator; and (b) in addition to, or instead of, any other penalty it may impose for the offence..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.5 Reserves—offences about damaging land Section 243 page 182 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 9.5 Reserves—offences about damaging land 243 What is damage to land?—pt 9.5 In this part: damage, to land, includes the destruction on the land, or removal from the land, of any of the following: (a) clay; (b) gravel; (c) rock; (d) sand; (e) soil; (f) stone. Examples—damage to land • crushing rocks • contaminating soil • heaping rocks, stones, gravel, sand, clay or soil • altering the soil profile 244 When does damage to land cause serious harm or material harm to a reserve?—pt 9.5 In this part: cause serious or material harm, means substantially contribute directly or indirectly to the harm. material harm—damage to land in a reserve causes material harm to the reserve if the cost of action needed to rehabilitate the area damaged is within the range of $5 000 to $50 000..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about damaging land Part 9.5 Section 245 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 183 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au serious harm—damage to land in a reserve causes serious harm to the reserve if— (a) it causes the loss of, or the loss of part of— (i) a critically endangered ecological community in the reserve; or (ii) an endangered ecological community in the reserve; or (iii) a vulnerable ecological community in the reserve; or Note Critically endangered, endangered and vulnerable ecological communities are threatened ecological communities—see s 69. (b) it causes a substantial loss of habitat of native plants or native animals in the reserve; or (c) the total area damaged in the reserve is more than 2ha; or (d) the cost of action needed to rehabilitate the land damaged in the reserve is more than $50 000. 245 Offence—damage land causing serious harm (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes serious harm to the reserve; and (d) the person knows that— (i) the land damaged is in a reserve; and (ii) the damage causes serious harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 2 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 7 years or both..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.5 Reserves—offences about damaging land Section 245 page 184 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes serious harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is reckless about whether— (i) the land damaged is in a reserve; and (ii) the damage causes serious harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 2 000 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both. (3) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes serious harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is negligent about whether— (i) the land damaged is in a reserve; and (ii) the damage causes serious harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 1 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 3 years or both. (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about damaging land Part 9.5 Section 246 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 185 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 246 Offence—damage land causing material harm (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes material harm to the reserve; and (d) the person knows that— (i) the land damaged is in a reserve; and (ii) the damage causes material harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 1 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes material harm to the reserve; and (d) the person is reckless about whether— (i) the land damaged is in a reserve; and (ii) the damage causes material harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 1 000 penalty units, imprisonment for 2 years or both. (3) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes material harm to the reserve; and.
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.5 Reserves—offences about damaging land Section 247 page 186 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (d) the person is negligent about whether— (i) the land damaged is in a reserve; and (ii) the damage causes material harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 750 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or both. (4) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. 247 Offence—damage land causing harm (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person damages land; and (b) the land is in a reserve; and (c) the damage causes harm to the reserve. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) A person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The chapter 9 exceptions are set out in s 252. (4) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this section if the defendant proves that the defendant took all reasonable steps to avoid committing the offence. Note The defendant has a legal burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 59). (5) In this section: harm, to a reserve, includes any loss or disadvantage to the environment in the reserve..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about damaging land Part 9.5 Section 248 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 187 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 248 Defence of appropriate diligence for offences—pt 9.5 It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this part if the defendant proves that the defendant took all reasonable precautions and exercised all appropriate diligence to prevent the commission of the offence. 249 Alternative verdicts for offences—pt 9.5 (1) This section applies if, in a prosecution for a relevant offence, the trier of fact— (a) is not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty of the relevant offence; but (b) is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty of an alternative offence. (2) The trier of fact may find the defendant guilty of the alternative offence, but only if the defendant has been given procedural fairness in relation to that finding of guilt. (3) In this section: alternative offence, for a relevant offence, means an offence mentioned in table 249, column 3, for the offence. relevant offence means an offence mentioned in table 249, column 2. Table 249 Alternative verdicts for offences—pt 9.5 column 1 item column 2 relevant offence column 3 alternative offence 1 s 245 (1) (knowingly damage land—serious harm) s 245 (2) (recklessly damage land—serious harm) s 245 (3) (negligently damage land—serious harm) 2 s 245 (2) (recklessly damage land—serious harm) s 245 (3) (negligently damage land—serious harm).
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.5 Reserves—offences about damaging land Section 250 page 188 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au column 1 item column 2 relevant offence column 3 alternative offence 3 s 246 (1) (knowingly damage land—material harm) s 246 (2) (recklessly damage land—material harm) s 246 (3) (negligently damage land—material harm) 4 s 246 (2) (recklessly damage land—material harm) s 246 (3) (negligently damage land—material harm) 250 Order to rehabilitate land etc (1) This section applies if a court convicts a person, or finds a person guilty, of an offence against this part. (2) The court may order the person to— (a) take any action the court considers appropriate, including action to— (i) mitigate the effect of the damage; or (ii) rehabilitate the land damaged as closely as possible to its condition before the damage; or (b) pay an amount to the Territory for reasonable costs incurred, or to be incurred, by the Territory in taking action— (i) mentioned in paragraph (a); or (ii) to monitor the outcome of action ordered under paragraph (a). (3) The court may also order the person to provide security for the performance of any obligation under the order. (4) The court may take action under this section— (a) on its own initiative or on the application of the conservator; and (b) in addition to, or instead of, any other penalty it may impose for the offence..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Reserves—offences about damaging land Part 9.5 Section 251 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 189 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 251 Order to publicise conviction or finding of guilt—pt 9.5 (1) This section applies if a court convicts a person, or finds a person guilty, of an offence against this part. (2) The court may order the person to take stated action to publicise— (a) the conviction or finding of guilt; and (b) the environmental and other consequences of the offence; and (c) any order made by the court under section 250 (2) (a); and (d) any action taken by the person— (i) to mitigate the effect of the damage; or (ii) to rehabilitate the land damaged as closely as possible to its condition before the damage. (3) The court may take action under this section— (a) on its own initiative or on the application of the conservator; and (b) in addition to, or instead of, any other penalty it may impose for the offence..
Chapter 9 Reserves—offences Part 9.6 Exceptions to offences Section 252 page 190 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 9.6 Exceptions to offences 252 Chapter 9 exceptions (1) This section applies if a person has the benefit of the chapter 9 exceptions for an offence. (2) The offence does not apply to the person if— (a) the conduct constituting the offence is— (i) a restricted activity under an activities declaration and the person is complying with the directions and requirements stated in the declaration; or Note Activities declaration—see s 256. Restricted activity—see s 256. (ii) undertaken in accordance with a management agreement; or Note Management agreement—see s 310. (iii) undertaken in implementing a controlled native species management plan under section 167 (Controlled native species management plan—conservator etc to implement); or Note Controlled native species management plan—see s 158. (iv) undertaken in carrying out minor public works on a reserve in accordance with a minor public works code approved by the conservator of flora and fauna under section 318A; or Note Minor public works—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, sch 4, s 4.1. Minor public works code—see s 318A. (v) undertaken in accordance with a cultural resource management plan; or Note Cultural resource management plan—see s 168A..
Reserves—offences Chapter 9 Exceptions to offences Part 9.6 Section 252 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 191 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the person is authorised to engage in the conduct constituting the offence under— (i) a nature conservation licence; or Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. (ii) a strategic bushfire management plan under the Emergencies Act 2004, section 72; or (iii) a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals); or (iv) a public unleased land permit; or (v) a licence under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 303 (Decision on licence applications for unleased land); or (c) the person is a conservation officer exercising a function under this Act. Note 1 The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). Note 2 This Act does not apply to emergency services personnel exercising functions under the Emergencies Act 2004 for the purpose of protecting life or property or controlling, extinguishing or preventing the spread of a fire (see s 7)..
Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.1 Resource protection areas Section 253 page 192 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Note Because reserves are public unleased land, the provisions of the Public Unleased Land Act 2013 also apply. For example, a person wishing to camp in a reserve may need a public unleased land permit if the camping is not authorised under this Act. Part 10.1 Resource protection areas 253 What is a resource protection area?—ch 10 In this chapter: resource protection area means an area declared by the Minister to be a resource protection area under section 254. 254 Resource protection area—declaration (1) The Minister may declare an area in a reserve to be a resource protection area (a resource protection area declaration). Note The power to make a declaration includes the power to amend or repeal the declaration. The power to amend or repeal the declaration is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the declaration (see Legislation Act, s 46). (2) A resource protection area declaration must— (a) state the purpose of the declaration, including a description of the environmental harm that the declaration is intended to reduce; and (b) identify the area to be declared as a resource protection area..
Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Chapter 10 Resource protection areas Part 10.1 Section 254 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 193 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) In deciding whether to make a resource protection area declaration, the Minister must consider— (a) the purpose for which the area was reserved in the territory plan under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 315 (Reserved areas—public land); and (b) the planning and development management objectives for the area; and Note Planning and development management objectives—see the dictionary. (c) for an area in a reserve that the conservator has assigned to an IUCN category—the IUCN reserve management objectives identified for the reserve. Note IUCN category—see s 171. IUCN reserve management objectives—see s 173. (4) In deciding whether to make a resource protection area declaration, the Minister must consult— (a) the conservator; and (b) the custodian of the area. (5) A resource protection area declaration is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. (6) In this section: environmental harm—see the Environment Protection Act 1997, dictionary..
Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.1 Resource protection areas Section 255 page 194 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 255 Resource protection area—review (1) The conservator must review a resource protection area declaration at least once every 3 years after the declaration commences. (2) In reviewing a resource protection area declaration, the conservator— (a) must consider the effectiveness of the declaration in achieving its stated purpose; and (b) may make recommendations to the Minister about the declaration..
Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Chapter 10 Prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.2 Section 256 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 195 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 10.2 Prohibited and restricted activities 256 Conservator may make activities declarations (1) This section applies if the conservator reasonably believes that a certain activity, if carried out in a reserve, may have a negative impact on the reserve. (2) The conservator may declare (an activities declaration) that a stated activity— (a) may be carried out in a stated reserve only if stated directions or requirements are complied with (a restricted activity); or (b) is prohibited in a stated reserve (a prohibited activity). Examples—activities in reserves • driving a motor vehicle • parking a motor vehicle • mooring a vessel • taking an animal • lighting, maintaining or using a fire • camping • swimming (3) In deciding whether to make an activities declaration for a reserve, the conservator must consider the reserve management plan for the reserve. Note Reserve management plan—see s 175. (4) An activities declaration is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (5) If the conservator makes an activities declaration for a reserve, the conservator must— (a) give additional public notice about the declaration; and.
Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.2 Prohibited and restricted activities Section 257 page 196 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) display a notice about the declaration in a conspicuous place at the reserve. Note 1 The power to make a declaration includes the power to amend or repeal the declaration (see Legislation Act, s 46). Note 2 Public notice means notice on an ACT government website or in a daily newspaper circulating in the ACT (see Legislation Act, dict, pt 1). The requirement in s (5) is in addition to the requirement for notification on the legislation register as a notifiable instrument. 257 Offence—carry on restricted activity in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) an activities declaration is in force for a reserve; and (b) the activities declaration states that an activity is a restricted activity for the reserve; and (c) the person carries on the restricted activity in the reserve in contravention of the activities declaration. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) an activities declaration is in force for a resource protection area in a reserve; and (b) the activities declaration states that an activity is a restricted activity for the resource protection area; and (c) the person carries out the restricted activity in the resource protection area in contravention of the activities declaration. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. Note Resource protection area—see s 253. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Chapter 10 Prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.2 Section 258 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 197 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) A person has the benefit of the part 10.2 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The part 10.2 exceptions are set out in s 261. 258 Offence—carry on prohibited activity in reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) an activities declaration is in force for a reserve; and (b) the activities declaration states that an activity is a prohibited activity for the reserve; and (c) the person carries out the prohibited activity in the reserve. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) an activities declaration is in force for a resource protection area in a reserve; and (b) the activities declaration states that an activity is a prohibited activity for the resource protection area; and (c) the person carries out the prohibited activity in the resource protection area. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note Resource protection area—see s 253. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (4) A person has the benefit of the part 10.2 exceptions for an offence against this section. Note The part 10.2 exceptions are set out in s 261..
Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.2 Prohibited and restricted activities Section 259 page 198 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 259 Conservator may close reserve (1) This section applies if— (a) the conservator reasonably believes that public access to a reserve may— (i) endanger public safety; or (ii) interfere with the management of the reserve; or (b) an area of a reserve is to be used as part of a cultural resource management plan. (2) The conservator may declare (a closed reserve declaration) that— (a) access to a reserve is restricted to stated people or a stated class of people; or (b) public access to a reserve is prohibited. (3) A closed reserve declaration is a notifiable instrument. Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. (4) If the conservator makes a closed reserve declaration, the conservator must— (a) give additional public notice about the declaration; and (b) display a notice about the declaration in a conspicuous place at the reserve. Note 1 The power to make a declaration includes the power to amend or repeal the declaration (see Legislation Act, s 46). Note 2 Public notice means notice on an ACT government website or in a daily newspaper circulating in the ACT (see Legislation Act, dict, pt 1). The requirement in s (4) is in addition to the requirement for notification on the legislation register as a notifiable instrument. (5) A closed reserve declaration may commence on a day or at a time earlier than its notification day..
Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Chapter 10 Prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.2 Section 260 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 199 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 260 Offence—enter closed reserve (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) a closed reserve declaration is in force for a reserve; and (b) the person enters the reserve in contravention of the declaration. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this section if the defendant proves that the defendant— (a) took reasonable steps to ensure that the contravention did not happen; or (b) had no reasonable grounds for suspecting that a closed reserve declaration was in force for the reserve. Note The defendant has a legal burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 59). 261 Part 10.2 exceptions (1) This section applies if a person has the benefit of the part 10.2 exceptions for an offence. (2) The offence does not apply to the person if— (a) the person is authorised to engage in the conduct constituting the offence under— (i) a nature conservation licence; or Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. (ii) a licence under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 303 (Decision on licence applications for unleased land); or (iii) a development approval under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7; or.
Chapter 10 Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities Part 10.2 Prohibited and restricted activities Section 261 page 200 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (iv) a work approval under the Public Unleased Land Act 2013, section 19; or (v) a public unleased land permit; or (vi) another law of the Territory; or (b) the person is a conservation officer exercising a function under this Act; or (c) the conduct constituting the offence is undertaken in accordance with a cultural resource management plan. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58). (3) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against this part if the defendant proves that the defendant took reasonable steps to ensure that the contravention did not happen. Note 1 The defendant has a legal burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 59). Note 2 This Act does not apply to emergency services personnel exercising functions under the Emergencies Act 2004 for the purpose of protecting life or property or controlling, extinguishing or preventing the spread of a fire (see s 7)..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—preliminary Part 11.1 Section 262 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 201 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.1 Licences—preliminary 262 What is a nature conservation licence? In this Act: nature conservation licence means a licence that authorises the licensee to carry on 1 or more activities (the licensed activity) that would otherwise be an offence under this Act. Note Some activities are unsuitable for a licence (see s 268 (1), def suitable activity, par (b)). 262A Who is an influential person for a corporation?—ch 11 (1) In this chapter: influential person, for a corporation, means any of the following: (a) an executive officer of the corporation; (b) a person who may exercise a relevant power in relation to the corporation; (c) a related corporation; (d) an executive officer of a related corporation. (2) In this section: related corporation means a related body corporate under the Corporations Act. relevant power, for a corporation, means a power— (a) to take part in a directorial, managerial or executive decision for the corporation; or.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.1 Licences—preliminary Section 263 page 202 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) to elect or appoint a person as an executive officer in the corporation; or (c) to exercise a significant influence in relation to the conduct of the corporation. 263 Offence—fail to comply with condition of licence (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person holds a licence; and (b) the licence is subject to a condition; and (c) the person fails to comply with the condition. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person holds a licence; and (b) the licence is subject to a financial assurance condition; and (c) the person fails to comply with the financial assurance condition. Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units. Note Financial assurance condition, on a licence—see s 278. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—application and suitability Part 11.2 Section 264 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 203 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.2 Licences—application and suitability 264 Licence—application (1) A person may apply to the conservator for a licence. (2) The application must— (a) be in writing; and (b) state the activity for the licence; and (c) include complete details of suitability information about— (i) the applicant; and (ii) if the applicant is a corporation—each influential person for the applicant; and (iii) if someone other than the applicant is to have management or control of the activity for the licence—each person who is to have management or control; and (iv) the activity for the licence. Note 1 Suitability information, about a person—see s 266. Suitability information, about an activity—see s 269. Note 2 Giving false or misleading information is an offence against the Criminal Code, s 338. Note 3 A fee may be determined under s 368 for this provision..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.2 Licences—application and suitability Section 265 page 204 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 265 Who is a suitable person to hold a licence?—ch 11 (1) In this chapter: suitable person, to hold a licence, means a person who the conservator is satisfied is a suitable person to hold the licence. (2) In deciding whether a person is a suitable person to hold a licence, the conservator must consider each of the following: (a) suitability information about the person; (b) any information given to the conservator under section 267 (Suitability of people—further information about people). 266 What is suitability information about a person?—ch 11 In this chapter: suitability information, about a person, means information about— (a) any conviction of, or finding of guilt against, the person for an offence against the following: (i) this Act; (ii) the Animal Welfare Act 1992; (iii) the Domestic Animals Act 2000; (iv) the Environment Protection Act 1997; (v) the Fisheries Act 2000; (vi) the Water Resources Act 2007;.
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—application and suitability Part 11.2 Section 267 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 205 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (vii) a law of another jurisdiction corresponding, or substantially corresponding, to this Act or an Act mentioned in subparagraphs (ii) to (vi); and Examples—subpar (vii) 1 Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth) 2 National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (NSW) 3 Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 (NSW) Note A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104). (b) any noncompliance by the person with a requirement under an Act mentioned in paragraph (a); and Example failing to comply with a treatment direction (see s 334) (c) any refusal of an application by the person for a licence, permit or other authority (however described) under an Act mentioned in paragraph (a); and (d) any other matter relevant to the person’s ability to appropriately carry on an activity in relation to an animal, plant or land; and (e) any other matter prescribed by regulation. 267 Suitability of people—further information about people (1) This section applies if the conservator is making a decision about whether a person is a suitable person to hold a licence. (2) The conservator may, by written notice given to the person (a personal information notice), require the person to give the conservator stated information about 1 or more of the following people, not later than a stated reasonable time: (a) the person;.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.2 Licences—application and suitability Section 268 page 206 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) if the person is a corporation—an influential person for the corporation. (3) The conservator need not decide whether a person is a suitable person to hold a licence if— (a) the conservator has given the person a personal information notice; and (b) the person does not comply with the notice. 268 What is a suitable activity for a licence? (1) In this Act: suitable activity, for a licence— (a) means an activity that the conservator is satisfied is suitable for the licence; but (b) does not include an activity prescribed by regulation as an unsuitable activity. (2) In deciding whether an activity is suitable for a licence, the conservator must consider each of the following: (a) suitability information about the activity; (b) any information about the activity given to the conservator under section 270 (Suitability of activities—further information about activity); (c) any risk management plan given to the conservator under section 271 (Suitability of activities—risk management plan); (d) the results of any inspection of a place by the conservator under section 272 (Suitability of activities—inspection of place);.
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—application and suitability Part 11.2 Section 268 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 207 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (e) if the activity involves a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process for which an action plan is in force—the action plan; Note Action plan—see s 99. Key threatening process—see s 74. Relevant ecological community and relevant species—see s 98. (f) if the activity involves a species for which a native species conservation plan is in force—the native species conservation plan; Note Native species conservation plan—see s 115. (g) if the activity involves a native species and a controlled native species management plan is in force for the native species—the controlled native species management plan; (h) if the activity is to be carried out in a reserve— (i) the planning and development management objectives for the reserve; and Note Planning and development management objectives—see the dictionary. (ii) for a reserve assigned to an IUCN category under section 172—the IUCN reserve management objectives identified for the reserve or area; Note IUCN category—see s 171. IUCN reserve management objectives—see s 173. (i) if the activity is to be carried out in a resource protection area— the purpose of the resource protection area declaration, including the environmental harm that the declaration is intended to reduce. Note Resource protection area declaration—see s 254. (3) In deciding whether an activity to be carried out in a reserve is suitable for a licence, the conservator must consult the custodian of the reserve..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.2 Licences—application and suitability Section 269 page 208 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 269 What is suitability information about an activity? In this Act: suitability information, about an activity, means information about— (a) the impact of the activity on the animal, plant or land; and Examples • ecological survey • action plan • species conservation plan (b) the purpose of the activity; and Examples • scientific research • education • commercial trade (c) the place where the activity is to be carried out; and (d) if the activity involves a native species—the number and species of each native species involved in the activity; and (e) any other matter prescribed by regulation. Note The conservator must also consider suitability information for an activity when deciding to amend or renew a licence (see s 286, s 288 and s 292). 270 Suitability of activities—further information about activity (1) This section applies if the conservator is making a decision about whether an activity is a suitable activity for a licence. (2) The conservator may, by written notice given to the applicant (an activity information notice), require the applicant to give the conservator stated information about the activity, not later than a stated reasonable time..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—application and suitability Part 11.2 Section 271 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 209 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) The conservator need not decide whether an activity is a suitable activity for a licence if— (a) the conservator has given the applicant an activity information notice; and (b) the applicant does not comply with the notice. 271 Suitability of activities—risk management plan (1) This section applies if the conservator is— (a) making a decision about whether an activity is a suitable activity for a licence; and (b) satisfied that carrying on the activity in accordance with the licence is likely to cause undue risk to people or property. (2) The conservator may, by written notice given to the applicant (a risk management plan notice), require the applicant to prepare a risk management plan for the licence. (3) The risk management plan must— (a) identify the risks to people and property; and (b) set out the procedures, practices and arrangements for eliminating or minimising the risks. (4) The conservator need not decide an application for a licence if— (a) the conservator has given the applicant a risk management plan notice; and (b) the applicant does not comply with the notice. 272 Suitability of activities—inspection of place (1) This section applies if— (a) the conservator is making a decision about whether an activity is suitable for a licence; and.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.2 Licences—application and suitability Section 272 page 210 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the activity involves keeping an animal. (2) The conservator may, by written notice given to the applicant (an inspection notice), require the applicant to allow the conservator to inspect the place where the animal is to be kept within a stated reasonable time. (3) The conservator need not decide whether an activity is a suitable activity for a licence if— (a) the conservator has given the applicant an inspection notice; and (b) the applicant does not comply with the notice..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—decision Part 11.3 Section 273 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 211 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.3 Licences—decision 273 Licence—decision on application (1) This section applies if the conservator receives an application for a licence. (2) The conservator may issue the licence to the applicant only if reasonably satisfied that— (a) the applicant is a suitable person to hold the licence; and (b) if the applicant is a corporation—each influential person for the applicant is a suitable person to hold the licence; and (c) if someone other than the applicant is to have management or control of the activity for the licence—each person who is to have management or control of the activity is a suitable person to hold the licence; and (d) the activity is a suitable activity for the licence. Note Suitable activity, for a licence—see s 268. Suitable person, to hold a licence—see s 265. (3) The conservator must, not later than the required time— (a) decide the application; and (b) tell the applicant about the decision on the application. (4) In this section: required time means the latest of the following: (a) if the conservator gives the applicant a personal information notice under section 267—28 days after the day the conservator receives the stated information; (b) if the conservator gives the applicant an activity information notice under section 270—28 days after the day the conservator receives the information;.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.3 Licences—decision Section 274 page 212 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) if the conservator gives the applicant a risk management plan notice under section 271—28 days after the day the conservator receives the risk management plan; (d) if the conservator gives the applicant an inspection notice under section 272—28 days after the day the conservator inspects the place; (e) 28 days after the day the conservator receives the application. Note Failure to issue a licence within the required time is taken to be a decision not to issue the licence (see ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, s 12). 274 Licence—conditions generally A licence is subject to any condition— (a) prescribed by regulation; and (b) that the conservator reasonably believes is necessary to meet the objects of this Act. Examples—par (b) 1 that the licensee may carry on the activity only during a stated season 2 that the licensee may carry on the activity only for non-commercial purposes 3 a financial assurance condition (see s 278) 275 Licence—conditions about native species conservation plans etc (1) This section applies if— (a) a licence is issued to carry out an activity on stated land; and (b) the land is subject to a native species conservation plan. Note Native species conservation plan, for a native species—see s 115. (2) The licence is subject to the condition that the activity must be carried out in accordance with the plan..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—decision Part 11.3 Section 276 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 213 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 276 Licence—term (1) A licence starts on the day stated in the licence. (2) The conservator must not issue a licence for longer than 5 years. (3) A licence expires on the day stated in the licence. (4) However, if the licensed activity involves keeping a native animal and the animal escapes, the licence no longer applies in relation to the animal. 277 Licence—form (1) A licence must— (a) be in writing; and (b) include the following information: (i) the name of the licensee; (ii) a unique identifying number (the licence number); (iii) the licensed activity; (iv) the animal, plant or land for the licence; (v) the term of the licence; (vi) the conditions on the licence; (vii) anything else prescribed by regulation. (2) A licence may include anything else the conservator considers relevant..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.4 Licences—financial assurance conditions Section 278 page 214 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.4 Licences—financial assurance conditions 278 What is a financial assurance condition? In this Act: financial assurance condition, on a licence, means a condition requiring the licensee to give the conservator a financial assurance of a stated kind and amount. 279 Financial assurance condition—imposition (1) The conservator may impose a financial assurance condition on a licence if satisfied that it is justified having regard to— (a) the likelihood that the licensed activity will cause serious or material damage to— (i) a population of a species or ecological community; or (ii) a habitat of a species or ecological community; or (iii) an ecosystem; and (b) the likelihood that action will need to be taken in the future to repair the damage; and (c) the financial assurance considerations (if any); and Note Financial assurance considerations—see s (5). (d) any other relevant matter. (2) A financial assurance must be in the form of— (a) a bank guarantee; or (b) a bond; or (c) an insurance policy; or.
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—financial assurance conditions Part 11.4 Section 280 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 215 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (d) if the conservator reasonably believes that, in the circumstances, the forms of assurance in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) are not appropriate—another form of security that the conservator considers appropriate. (3) The conservator must not require financial assurance of an amount greater than the total amount that the conservator reasonably believes is needed to repair the damage that could result from the activity. (4) A financial assurance must be given for the period stated in the financial assurance condition on the licence. (5) The Minister may determine matters to be considered by the conservator in deciding whether to impose a financial assurance condition on a licence (financial assurance considerations). (6) A determination is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 280 Financial assurance condition—show cause (1) If the conservator proposes to impose a financial assurance condition on a licence, the conservator must give the applicant or licensee written notice of the intention to impose the condition. (2) The notice must state— (a) the grounds for the proposed financial assurance condition; and (b) the amount and form of the proposed financial assurance; and (c) that the applicant or licensee may give a written submission to the conservator showing cause why the proposed financial assurance condition should not be imposed; and (d) that submissions may be given to the conservator only during the 20 working days after the day the notice is given to the licensee (the show cause period)..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.4 Licences—financial assurance conditions Section 281 page 216 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) The conservator must, within 20 working days after the end of the show cause period— (a) consider any submissions received under subsection (2) (d); and (b) decide whether to impose the financial assurance condition; and (c) tell the applicant, or licensee, in writing (a decision notice)— (i) about the decision; and (ii) if the condition is to be imposed—when the financial assurance must be provided (the due date). (4) The conservator must not decide a due date that is earlier than 10 working days after the day the decision notice is given to the licensee. 281 Financial assurance condition—licence cancellation (1) This section applies if— (a) the conservator imposes a financial assurance condition on a licence; and (b) the licensee does not provide the financial assurance— (i) in accordance with the financial assurance condition; or (ii) by the due date. (2) The conservator must cancel the licence. 282 Financial assurance condition—claim or realisation (1) This section applies if— (a) a licence is subject to a financial assurance condition; and (b) a population, habitat or ecosystem is seriously or materially damaged because of the licensed activity; and.
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—financial assurance conditions Part 11.4 Section 283 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 217 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the conservator incurs, or will incur, expenses in repairing the damage; and (d) the damage is the kind of harm for which the financial assurance may be claimed or realised; and (e) the damage was not licensed under this Act. (2) The conservator may recover the reasonable expenses of repairing the damage by making a claim on or realising the financial assurance. 283 Financial assurance condition—notice before claim or realisation (1) Before acting under section 282, the conservator must give the licensee, a written notice stating— (a) the serious or material damage caused by the use of the licensed place; and (b) details of the action taken, or to be taken, to repair the damage; and (c) the amount of the financial assurance to be claimed or realised; and (d) that the licensee may give a written submission to the conservator showing cause why the financial assurance should not be claimed or realised as proposed; and (e) that a submission may be given to the conservator only during the 20 working days (the show cause period) after the day the notice is given to the licensee. (2) The conservator must, within 20 working days after the end of the show cause period— (a) consider any submission received under subsection (1) (e); and (b) decide whether to make a claim on or realise the financial assurance; and.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.4 Licences—financial assurance conditions Section 284 page 218 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) tell the licensee about the decision. 284 Financial assurance condition—recovery of extra costs (1) This section applies if— (a) the conservator makes a claim on or realises a financial assurance under a licence; and (b) the amount recovered by the conservator (the realised assurance) is less than the reasonable expenses that the conservator incurred, or will incur, in repairing the damage. (2) The conservator may give the licensee written notice— (a) requiring the licensee to pay the stated amount, being the difference between the reasonable expenses and the realised assurance; and (b) stating when the stated amount is required to be paid (the due date). (3) The conservator must not decide a due date that is earlier than 20 working days after the day the notice is given to the licensee. (4) If the licensee does not pay the stated amount on or before the due date, the amount that remains unpaid, together with interest on the unpaid amount, is a debt due to the Territory by the licensee. Note 1 A rate of interest may be determined under s 368 for this provision. Note 2 An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177)..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—financial assurance conditions Part 11.4 Section 285 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 219 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 285 Financial assurance condition—money held by Territory (1) If an amount of money is held by the Territory as a financial assurance, the following provisions apply: (a) interest accrues on so much of the original amount as from time to time remains unclaimed by the conservator under section 282 (Financial assurance condition—claim or realisation); Note A rate of interest may be determined under s 368 for this provision. (b) for a claim made by the conservator under section 282—the financial assurance is taken to include any accrued interest other than interest to which the licensee is entitled to be paid under paragraph (c); (c) during the period for which the financial assurance is required, on each anniversary of the payment of the original amount, the licensee is entitled to be paid by the Territory so much of the interest that accrued during the year that ended on the day before that anniversary as remains unclaimed by the conservator under section 282; (d) the amount of the original amount and accrued interest that remains unclaimed by the conservator under section 282 must be paid by the Territory to the licensee if the financial assurance is no longer required by the conservator. (2) For this section, a financial assurance is no longer required by the conservator if— (a) the conservator is satisfied that a financial assurance condition is no longer justified under section 279 (Financial assurance condition—imposition); or (b) the licence has ended and section 282 (Financial assurance condition—claim or realisation) does not apply..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Section 286 page 220 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal 286 Licence—amendment initiated by conservator (1) The conservator may, by written notice (an amendment notice) given to a licensee, amend the licence if satisfied that— (a) the licensee is a suitable person to hold the licence as amended; and (b) if the licensee is a corporation—each influential person for the licensee is a suitable person to hold the licence as amended; and (c) the licensed activity is a suitable activity for the licence as amended. Note Suitable activity, for a licence—see s 268. Suitable person, to hold a licence—see s 265. (2) However, the conservator may amend the licence only if— (a) the conservator has given the licensee written notice of the proposed amendment (a proposal notice); and (b) the proposal notice states that written submissions about the proposal may be made to the conservator before the end of a stated period of at least 14 days after the day the proposal notice is given to the licensee; and (c) after the end of the stated period, the conservator has considered any submissions made in accordance with the proposal notice. (3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a person if the licensee applied for, or agreed in writing to, the amendment. (4) The amendment takes effect on the day the amendment notice is given to the licensee or a later day stated in the notice..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Part 11.5 Section 287 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 221 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 287 Licence—application to amend licence (1) A licensee may apply to the conservator to amend the licence. (2) A licensee must apply to the conservator for amendment of the licence if someone else (the new person) is to— (a) have management or control of the licensed activity; or (b) if the licensee is a corporation—become an influential person for the licensee. (3) The application must— (a) be in writing; and (b) if the application is under subsection (2)—include complete details of suitability information about the new person. Note 1 Suitability information, about a person—see s 266. Note 2 Giving false or misleading information is an offence against the Criminal Code, s 338. Note 3 A fee may be determined under s 368 for this provision. 288 Licence—decision on application to amend licence (1) This section applies if the conservator receives an application to amend a licence under section 287. (2) The conservator may amend the licence only if satisfied that— (a) the licensee is a suitable person to hold the licence as amended; and (b) if the licensee is a corporation—each influential person for the licensee is a suitable person to hold the licence as amended; and (c) if someone other than the proposed new licensee is to have management or control of the activity for the licence—each person who is to have management or control of the activity is a suitable person to hold the licence as amended; and.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Section 288 page 222 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (d) the licensed activity is a suitable activity for the licence as amended. Note Suitable activity, for a licence—see s 268. Suitable person, to hold a licence—see s 265. (3) If the conservator decides to amend the licence, the conservator may impose or amend a condition on the licence. (4) The conservator must, not later than the required time— (a) decide the application for amendment; and (b) tell the licensee about the decision. (5) In this section: required time means the latest of the following: (a) if the conservator gives a person mentioned in section 287 (2) a personal information notice under section 267—28 days after the day the conservator receives the stated information; (b) if the conservator gives the applicant an activity information notice under section 270—28 days after the day the conservator receives the information; (c) if the conservator gives the applicant a risk management plan notice under section 271—28 days after the day the conservator receives the risk management plan; (d) if the conservator gives the applicant an inspection notice under section 272—28 days after the day the conservator inspects the place; (e) 28 days after the day the conservator receives the application. Note Failure to amend a licence within the required time is taken to be a decision not to amend the licence (see ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, s 12)..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Part 11.5 Section 289 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 223 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 289 Licence—application to transfer licence (1) A licensee may apply to the conservator to transfer the licence to someone else (the proposed new licensee). (2) The application must— (a) be in writing; and (b) include complete details of suitability information about— (i) the proposed new licensee; and (ii) if the proposed new licensee is a corporation—each influential person for the proposed new licensee; and (iii) if someone other than the proposed new licensee is to have management or control of the activity for the licence— each person who is to have management or control of the activity. Note 1 Suitability information, about a person—see s 266. Note 2 Giving false or misleading information is an offence against the Criminal Code, s 338. Note 3 A fee may be determined under s 368 for this provision. 290 Licence—decision on application to transfer licence (1) This section applies if the conservator receives an application to transfer a licence under section 289. (2) The conservator may transfer the licence to the proposed new licensee only if satisfied that each of the following people is a suitable person to hold the licence: (a) the proposed new licensee; (b) if the proposed new licensee is a corporation—each influential person for the proposed new licensee;.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Section 291 page 224 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) if someone other than the proposed new licensee is to have management or control of the activity for the licence—each person who is to have management or control of the activity. Note Suitable person, to hold a licence—see s 265. (3) If the conservator decides to transfer the licence, the conservator may impose or amend a condition on the licence. (4) The conservator must, not later than the required time— (a) decide the application for transfer; and (b) tell the old licensee and new licensee about the decision. (5) In this section: required time means the latest of the following: (a) if the conservator gives a person mentioned in section 289 (2) (b) a personal information notice under section 267—28 days after the day the conservator receives the stated information; (b) 28 days after the day the conservator receives the application. Note Failure to transfer a licence within the required time is taken to be a decision not to transfer the licence (see ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, s 12). 291 Licence—application for renewal of licence (1) A licensee may apply to the conservator to renew the licence for a period not longer than 5 years. Note A fee may be determined under s 368 for this provision. (2) The application must be— (a) in writing; and (b) received by the conservator at least 30 days before the licence expires..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Part 11.5 Section 292 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 225 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) However, the conservator may extend the time for making an application. Note A licensee may apply to the conservator for the time to be extended, and the conservator may extend the time, even though the time has ended (see Legislation Act, s 151C). (4) If a licensee applies to renew a licence under this section, the licence remains in force until the application is decided. 292 Licence—decision on application for renewal of licence (1) This section applies if the conservator receives an application for renewal of a licence under section 291. (2) The conservator may renew the licence only if satisfied that— (a) the licensee continues to be a suitable person to hold the licence; and (b) if the licensee is a corporation—each influential person for the licensee continues to be a suitable person to hold the licence; and (c) if someone other than the licensee has management or control of the licensed activity—each person who is to have management or control of the activity continues to be a suitable person to hold the licence; and (d) the licensed activity continues to be a suitable activity for the licence. Note Suitable activity, for a licence—see s 268. Suitable person, to hold a licence—see s 265. (3) If the conservator decides to renew the licence, the conservator may impose or amend a condition on the licence. (4) The conservator must, not later than the required time— (a) decide the application for renewal; and (b) tell the licensee about the decision..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Section 293 page 226 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) In this section: required time means the latest of the following: (a) if the conservator gives the applicant a personal information notice under section 267—28 days after the day the conservator receives the stated information; (b) if the conservator gives the applicant an activity information notice under section 270—28 days after the day the conservator receives the information; (c) if the conservator gives the applicant a risk management plan notice under section 271—28 days after the day the conservator receives the risk management plan; (d) if the conservator gives the applicant an inspection notice under section 272—28 days after the day the conservator inspects the place; (e) 28 days after the day the conservator receives the application. Note Failure to renew a licence within the required time is taken to be a decision not to renew the licence (see ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, s 12). 293 Licence—replacing when lost, stolen or destroyed (1) The conservator may issue a replacement licence to a licensee if satisfied that the licensee’s original licence has been lost, stolen or destroyed. (2) For subsection (1), the conservator may require the licensee to give the conservator a statement verifying that the original licence has been lost, stolen or destroyed. Note 1 A fee may be determined under s 368 for this provision. Note 2 It is an offence to make a false or misleading statement, give false or misleading information or produce a false or misleading document (see Criminal Code, pt 3.4)..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Part 11.5 Section 294 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 227 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 294 Licence—surrender (1) A licensee may surrender the licence by giving written notice of the surrender (a surrender notice) to the conservator. (2) The surrender notice must be accompanied by— (a) the licence; or (b) if the licence has been lost, stolen or destroyed—a statement by the licensee verifying that the licence has been lost, stolen or destroyed. Note It is an offence to make a false or misleading statement, give false or misleading information or produce a false or misleading document (see Criminal Code, pt 3.4). 295 Offence—fail to notify change of name or address (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person is a licensee; and (b) the person’s name or address changes; and (c) the person does not, within 30 days after the change, give the conservator— (i) written notice of the change; and (ii) the licence. Maximum penalty: 1 penalty unit. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.5 Licences—amendment, transfer and renewal Section 296 page 228 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 296 Licence—conservator to change name and address (1) This section applies if a licensee gives the conservator— (a) written notice of a change to the person’s name or address; and (b) the licence. (2) The conservator must enter the changed details on the licence and return it to the licensee..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—regulatory action Part 11.6 Section 297 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 229 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.6 Licences—regulatory action 297 Licence—grounds for regulatory action (1) Each of the following is a ground for regulatory action against a licensee: (a) the licensee has contravened, or is contravening, a provision of this Act; Note A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104). (b) the licensee has contravened a condition of the licence. (2) In this section: licensee includes, if the person is a corporation, each executive officer of the corporation. 298 Licence—regulatory action Each of the following is regulatory action when taken against a licensee: (a) imposing a condition on, or amending a condition on, the licence; (b) suspending the licence for a stated period or until a stated thing happens; (c) cancelling the licence; (d) cancelling the licence and disqualifying the person from applying for a licence of that kind for a stated period or until a stated thing happens..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.6 Licences—regulatory action Section 299 page 230 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 299 Licence—taking regulatory action (1) If the conservator proposes to take regulatory action in relation to a licensee, the conservator must give the licensee a written notice (a show cause notice) stating— (a) details of the proposed regulatory action; and (b) the grounds for the proposed regulatory action; and (c) that the licensee may, not later than 14 days after the day the licensee is given the notice, give a written submission to the conservator about the proposed regulatory action. (2) In deciding whether to take the proposed regulatory action, the conservator must consider any submission given to the conservator in accordance with the show cause notice. (3) If the conservator believes on reasonable grounds that a ground for regulatory action has been established in relation to the licensee, the conservator may— (a) take the regulatory action stated in the show cause notice; or (b) if the proposed regulatory action is cancelling the licence and disqualifying the person from applying for a licence— (i) cancel the licence; or (ii) suspend the licence; or (iii) impose a condition on, or amend a condition on, the licence; or (c) if the proposed regulatory action is cancelling the licence— (i) suspend the licence; or (ii) impose a condition on, or amend a condition on, the licence; or.
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—regulatory action Part 11.6 Section 300 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 231 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (d) if the proposed regulatory action is suspending the licence— (i) suspend the licence for a shorter period; or (ii) impose a condition on, or amend a condition on, the licence. (4) Regulatory action under this section takes effect on— (a) the day the licensee is given written notice of the decision; or (b) if the written notice states a later date of effect—that date. 300 Licence—immediate suspension (1) This section applies if— (a) the conservator gives a show cause notice to a licensee; and (b) having regard to the grounds stated in the notice, the conservator believes on reasonable grounds that the person’s licence should be suspended immediately because of a risk to— (i) public safety; or (ii) the safety of an animal or plant. (2) The conservator must give the licensee a written notice (an immediate suspension notice) suspending the person’s licence. (3) The suspension of a licence under this section takes effect when the immediate suspension notice is given to the licensee. (4) The suspension of a licence under this section ends— (a) if regulatory action is taken against the person—at the earlier of the following times: (i) when the regulatory action takes effect; (ii) 30 days after the day the immediate suspension notice is given to the person; or.
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.6 Licences—regulatory action Section 301 page 232 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) if regulatory action is not taken against the person—at the earlier of the following times: (i) when the person is given written notice of the conservator’s decision not to take regulatory action; (ii) 30 days after the day the immediate suspension notice is given to the person. 301 Licence—effect of suspension (1) A suspended licence does not authorise the carrying on of any activity under the licence during the suspension. (2) If the conservator suspends a licence, the licensee is, during the suspension— (a) taken not to hold the licence; and (b) disqualified from applying for a licence. 302 Offence—fail to return amended, suspended or cancelled licences (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person is a licensee; and (b) the licence is amended, suspended or cancelled under this division; and (c) the person fails to return the licence to the conservator as soon as practicable (but not later than 7 days) after the day the person is given a reviewable decision notice under section 361. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licences—regulatory action Part 11.6 Section 303 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 233 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 303 Action by conservator in relation to amended or suspended licence (1) This section applies if— (a) a licence is amended or suspended under this part; and (b) the licence is returned to the conservator. (2) For an amended licence, the conservator must— (a) return the amended licence to the licensee; or (b) give the licensee a replacement licence that includes the amendment. (3) If a licence is suspended under this part and the suspension ends before the end of the term of the licence, the conservator must return the licence to the licensee when the suspension ends..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.7 Licence—register, records and royalties Section 304 page 234 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 11.7 Licence—register, records and royalties 304 Licence register (1) The conservator must keep a register of licences (the licence register). (2) The licence register must include the following details for each licence: (a) the name of the licensee; (b) the licence number; (c) the licensed activity; (d) the term of the licence; (e) the conditions on the licence; (f) anything else prescribed by regulation. (3) The licence register may include anything else the conservator considers relevant. (4) The licence register may be kept in any form, including electronically, that the conservator decides. 305 Licence register—correction and keeping up to date (1) The conservator may correct a mistake, error or omission in the licence register. (2) The conservator may change a detail included in the register to keep the register up to date..
Nature conservation licences Chapter 11 Licence—register, records and royalties Part 11.7 Section 306 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 235 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 306 Offence—fail to keep records (1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person is a licensee; and (b) the licence authorises the person to carry on an activity involving an animal or plant; and (c) the person does not keep the records required by regulation for the licence. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person is a licensee; and (b) the licence authorises the person to carry on an activity involving an animal, or plant, that has special protection status; and (c) the person does not keep the records required by regulation for the licence. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. Note Special protection status—see s 109. (3) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. Note A conservation officer may direct a licensee to produce records required to be kept under this Act (see s 321). It is an offence to fail to comply with the direction (see s 322)..
Chapter 11 Nature conservation licences Part 11.7 Licence—register, records and royalties Section 307 page 236 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 307 Royalty (1) This section applies if a licence authorises a licensee to— (a) take a native animal; or (b) take a native plant; or (c) take native timber. Note Native timber—see s 139. (2) If the licensee sells or otherwise disposes of an animal, plant or timber taken under the licence, the licensee must pay royalty for the animal, plant or timber to the Territory at the rate prescribed by regulation. Note Power to make a statutory instrument (including a regulation) includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make a regulation that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48)..
Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others Chapter 12 Section 308 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 237 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 12 Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others 308 What are agencies and activities of agencies?—ch 12 (1) In this chapter: agency— (a) means an entity that is— (i) a supplier of gas, electricity, water or sewerage services; or (ii) responsible for the construction, repair and maintenance of navigation serving beacons and telecommunications facilities; or (iii) responsible for a development of land; and (b) includes the Territory to the extent to which the Territory is an entity mentioned in paragraph (a). Note Entity includes a person (see Legislation Act, dict, pt 1). (2) In this chapter: activities, of an agency means— (a) for an entity that supplies gas, electricity, water or sewerage services—construction, repair or maintenance carried out by the entity in association with the supply of the services; or (b) for an entity responsible for the construction, repair and maintenance of navigation serving beacons and telecommunications facilities—the construction, repair and maintenance of navigation serving beacons and telecommunications facilities carried out by the entity; or.
Chapter 12 Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others Section 309 page 238 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) for an entity responsible for the development of land—the entity’s development activities. (3) In this section: development, of land—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 7 (Meaning of development). telecommunications facility—see the Utilities (Telecommunications Installations) Act 2001, dictionary. 309 What are management objectives?—ch 12 (1) In this chapter: management objectives, for public land or unleased territory land— (a) means the objective of conserving the qualities of the natural environment on and near the land; and (b) includes— (i) any objectives, policies or purposes stated in the Territory plan for the land; and (ii) for public land—the planning and development management objectives for the land. Note Planning and development management objectives— see the dictionary. (2) In this section: natural environment means all biological, physical and visual elements of the earth and its atmosphere, whether natural or modified..
Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others Chapter 12 Section 310 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 239 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 310 What is a management agreement?—ch 12 In this chapter: management agreement means an agreement between the conservator and an agency, in relation to public land or unleased territory land, that— (a) sets out standards and conditions for avoiding or minimising any conflict with the management objectives for the land which may arise as a result of the agency’s activities; and (b) may deal with the following matters: (i) access to the public land or unleased territory land; (ii) fire management on the public land or unleased territory land; (iii) drainage on the public land or unleased territory land; (iv) management and maintenance of public or private facilities on the public land or unleased territory land; (v) rehabilitation of the public land or unleased territory land or public or private facilities on the land; (vi) indemnities; (vii) emergency procedures to be used on the public land or unleased territory land; (viii) internal stockpiling on the public land or unleased territory land; (ix) fencing on the public land or unleased territory land; (x) feral animals and weed control on the public land or unleased territory land; but (c) does not conflict with a development approval given under the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7..
Chapter 12 Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others Section 311 page 240 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 311 Management agreement—conservator may propose (1) The conservator may propose a management agreement to an agency if— (a) the agency’s activities affect, or may affect, public land or unleased territory land; and (b) the conservator reasonably believes the activities may conflict with the management objectives for the land. (2) If the conservator intends to propose a management agreement to an agency, the conservator must— (a) consult the agency in developing the agreement; and (b) consider any representations made by the agency about the agreement. (3) After consulting and considering any representations under subsection (2), the conservator must give the agreement (the proposed agreement) to the agency together with a notice stating— (a) that the agency may— (i) enter into the proposed agreement by signing the agreement and returning it to the conservator within 28 days after the date of the notice (the due date); or (ii) refuse to enter into the proposed agreement by telling the conservator, in writing, of the refusal before the due date; and (b) that if the agency does not act under paragraph (a) before the due date, that the agency will be taken to have refused to enter into the proposed agreement; and.
Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others Chapter 12 Section 312 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 241 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the consequences under this part for the agency of— (i) refusing to enter into the proposed agreement; and (ii) if the agency enters the agreement—breaching a term of the agreement. 312 Management agreement—agency may enter or refuse (1) If the conservator has given a proposed agreement to an agency under section 311, the agency may— (a) enter into the proposed agreement by signing the agreement and returning it to the conservator before the due date; or (b) refuse to enter into the agreement by telling the conservator, in writing, of the refusal before the due date. (2) If an agency does not act under subsection (1), the agency is taken to have refused to enter into the proposed agreement. 313 Management agreement—refusal and repairing damage (1) This section applies if— (a) an agency refuses to enter into a proposed agreement for public land or unleased territory land; and (b) the agency’s activities damage the land. (2) The conservator may— (a) repair the damage; and (b) recover from the agency the reasonable costs of repairing the damage. Note An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177)..
Chapter 12 Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others Section 314 page 242 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 314 Management agreement—breach of agreement and repairing damage (1) This section applies if— (a) an agency enters into a management agreement for public land or unleased territory land; and (b) the agency carries on activities on the land that are inconsistent with the agreement; and (c) the activities damage the land. (2) The conservator may— (a) repair the damage; and (b) recover from the agency the reasonable costs of repairing the damage. Note An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177)..
Land development applications Chapter 13 Section 315 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 243 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 13 Land development applications 315 Meaning of development—ch 13 (1) In this chapter: development means a proposed development to which a development application applies. (2) In this section: development application—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, dictionary. 316 Simplified outline The following notes provide a simplified outline of this chapter and the Planning and Development Act 2007, chapter 7 (Development approvals): Note 1 Conservator to be given copy of certain development applications The planning and land authority is required to give the conservator a copy of each development application that is likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact on a protected matter (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 147A). The planning and land authority may also be required to give the conservator a copy of each development application in the merit track or impact track (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 148). This requirement does not apply to a development application for a development proposal in the code track (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 117 (c)). Note 2 Conservator to give advice about development application The conservator gives advice to the planning and land authority about adverse environmental impacts of the proposed development (see s 317 and s 318) (see also Planning and Development Act 2007, s 149, s 150 and s 151). Note 3 Conservator’s advice to be considered The conservator’s advice must be considered by the planning and land authority (or the Minister) in approving or refusing to approve a development application (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 119 (2), s 120 (d) and s 129 (e))..
Chapter 13 Land development applications Section 317 page 244 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Note 4 Development approval by authority to be consistent with conservator’s advice If the authority is to decide the development application, development approval must not be given unless the development proposal is consistent with the conservator’s advice (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 128 (1) (b) (vi)). Note 5 Development approval by Minister may be inconsistent with conservator’s advice If the Minister is to decide the development application (using the Minister’s call-in power (see Planning and Development Act 2007, div 7.3.5)), the development approval may be inconsistent with the conservator’s advice if the Minister is satisfied that the approval is consistent with the offsets policy (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 128 (2)). 317 Advice about adverse environmental impacts (1) This section applies if the conservator is satisfied on reasonable grounds that a proposed development is likely to have an adverse environmental impact. (2) The conservator may give the planning and land authority written advice in accordance with section 318 about the development. Note If the planning and land authority refers a development application to the conservator under the Planning and Development Act 2007, s 147A or s 148, the conservator must, not later than 15 working days after being given the application, give the planning and land authority its advice (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 149). 318 Requirements for conservator’s advice (1) This section applies if the conservator gives advice— (a) under section 317 about a development; or (b) under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 149 (Requirement to give advice in relation to development applications) about a development application..
Land development applications Chapter 13 Section 318 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 245 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) The conservator’s advice must include— (a) an outline of the environmental impact of the proposed development; and (b) advice about ways to avoid or minimise the environmental impact of the proposed development; and (c) an assessment of whether the proposed development is likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact on a protected matter; and (d) if the proposed development is likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact on a protected matter—advice about suitable offsets for the proposed development. Note 1 If the proposed development is likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact, the development application may be declared to be in the impact track (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 124), and may require an offset (see Planning and Development Act 2007, s 111C, def offset). Note 2 Significant adverse environmental impact—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, s 124A. (3) In preparing the advice, the conservator— (a) must consider— (i) the policy statement ‘Significant Impact Guidelines— Matters of National Environmental Significance’ published by the Commonwealth, as in force from time to time; and Note The policy statement is available at www.environment.gov.au. (ii) the offsets policy; and.
Chapter 13 Land development applications Section 318 page 246 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) may consider any other guideline, plan or policy published by the Territory or the Commonwealth about— (i) protected matters; or (ii) matters of national environmental significance. (4) In this section: offset, for a development—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 111C. offsets policy—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 111E. protected matter—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 111A. significant adverse environmental impact—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 124A..
Minor public works in reserves Chapter 13A Section 318A R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 247 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 13A Minor public works in reserves 318A Minor public works code (1) The conservator of flora and fauna may approve a code of practice (a minor public works code) for minor public works carried out by or for the Territory in a reserve. Note A power given under an Act to make a statutory instrument (including a code of practice) includes power to amend or repeal the instrument (see Legislation Act, s 46 (1)). (2) A minor public works code— (a) must set out standards and practices for carrying out minor public works in a reserve to ensure the works are not likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact; and (b) may include the following: (i) circumstances in which minor public works are not likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact; (ii) conditions to apply to stated minor public works to ensure the works do not have a significant adverse environmental impact. Note Power to make a statutory instrument includes power to make different provision in relation to different matters or different classes of matters, and to make an instrument that applies differently by reference to stated exceptions or factors (see Legislation Act, s 48)..
Chapter 13A Minor public works in reserves Section 318A page 248 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (3) An approved minor public works code may apply, adopt or incorporate a law or instrument as in force from time to time. Note 1 The text of an applied, adopted or incorporated law or instrument, whether applied as in force from time to time or at a particular time, is taken to be a notifiable instrument if the operation of the Legislation Act, s 47 (5) or (6) is not disapplied (see s 47 (7)). Note 2 A notifiable instrument must be notified under the Legislation Act. Note 3 A reference to an instrument includes a reference to a provision of an instrument (see Legislation Act, s 14 (2)). (4) If the conservator of flora and fauna approves a minor public works code, the conservator must review the code at least once every 5 years. (5) An approved minor public works code is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. (6) In this section: minor public works—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, schedule 4, section 4.1..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 319 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 249 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions 319 Direction to give name and address (1) This section applies if a conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that a person— (a) has committed, is committing or is about to commit an offence against this Act; or (b) may be able to assist in the investigation of an offence against this Act. Note A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104). (2) The conservation officer may direct the person to give the conservation officer, immediately, any of the following personal details (a name and address direction): (a) the person’s full name; (b) the person’s home address. Note 1 The conservation officer must first show the person the conservation officer’s identity card (see s 30). Note 2 The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). (3) If the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that a personal detail given by a person in response to a name and address direction is false or misleading, the conservation officer may direct the person to produce evidence immediately of the correctness of the detail (an evidence direction)..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 320 page 250 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) If a conservation officer gives a direction to a person, the officer must tell the person that it is an offence if the person fails to comply with the direction. (5) If a conservation officer gives a direction to a person, the officer must give the direction in a language, or way of communicating, that the person is likely to understand. 320 Offence—fail to comply with direction to give name and address (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to— (i) a name and address direction; or (ii) an evidence direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 5 penalty units. Note It is an offence to make a false or misleading statement or give false or misleading information (see Criminal Code, pt 3.4). (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the conservation officer did not— (a) produce the conservation officer’s identity card for inspection by the person before giving the direction; or (b) before giving the direction, warn the person that failure to comply with the direction is an offence. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58)..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 321 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 251 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 321 Direction to produce licence or records (1) A conservation officer may direct a licensee to produce— (a) the licensee’s nature conservation licence; or (b) a record required to be kept by the licensee under this Act. Note 1 A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104). Note 2 It is an offence to make a false or misleading statement or give false or misleading information (see Criminal Code, pt 3.4). Note 3 The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). (2) The direction must be in writing and state— (a) the licence or record to be produced; and (b) where and to whom the licence or record is to be produced; and (c) when the direction must be complied with (the due date), being a day at least 2 days after the day the direction is given to the person; and (d) that if the licence or record is not provided by the due date, the person may be committing an offence under section 322. (3) The conservation officer may do 1 or more of the following: (a) inspect the licence or record produced; (b) make copies of, or take extracts from the licence or record produced; (c) seize and remove the licence or record produced if the officer believes on reasonable grounds that it may provide evidence of an offence against this Act..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 322 page 252 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 322 Offence—fail to comply with direction to produce licence or record (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a direction under section 321; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person has a reasonable excuse for failing to comply with the direction. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 323 Direction to provide information (1) This section applies if a conservation officer suspects on reasonable grounds that a person has information or documents reasonably required by the conservation officer for the administration or enforcement of this Act. (2) The conservation officer may direct the person to provide the information or documents to the conservation officer (an information direction). (3) The direction must be in writing and state— (a) the name of the person to whom it is directed; and (b) the information or documents required to be provided; and (c) why the information or documents are required; and (d) when the direction must be complied with (the due date), being a day at least 2 days after the day the direction is given to the person; and.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 324 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 253 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (e) that if the information is not provided by the due date the person may be committing an offence under section 324. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). 324 Offence—fail to comply with information direction (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to an information direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. Note It is an offence to make a false or misleading statement or give false or misleading information (see Criminal Code, pt 3.4). (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person— (a) did not know, and could not reasonably be expected to know or find out, the information required under the direction; or (b) did not have reasonable access to the documents required under the direction. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 325 Direction to leave reserve (1) This section applies if a conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that a person— (a) is in a reserve; and.
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 326 page 254 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) either— (i) has acted in— (A) an offensive way; or (B) a way that creates a public nuisance; or (ii) has committed, is committing or is about to commit an offence against this Act. Note A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104). (2) The conservation officer may direct the person to immediately leave the reserve (a leave reserve direction). Note The conservation officer must first show the person the conservation officer’s identity card (see s 30). (3) If a conservation officer gives a direction to a person, the officer must tell the person that it is an offence if the person fails to comply with the direction. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). 326 Offence—fail to comply with direction to leave reserve (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a leave reserve direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the conservation officer did not—.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 327 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 255 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (a) produce the conservation officer’s identity card for inspection by the person before giving the direction; or (b) before giving the direction, warn the person that failure to comply with the direction is an offence. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 327 Direction to stop vehicle containing animal or plant (1) This section applies if a conservation officer suspects on reasonable grounds that an animal or plant is in a vehicle in contravention of this Act. Note In, a vehicle, includes on the vehicle (see dict). Vehicle includes vessel (see dict). (2) The conservation officer may, to exercise a function under division 14.2.2 (Powers of conservation officers), direct the driver of the vehicle to stop the vehicle (a stop vehicle direction)— (a) without delay; or (b) at the nearest place that the vehicle can be safely stopped as indicated by the conservation officer. Note A conservation officer can enter a vehicle stopped under this section (see s 338 (1) (g)) and inspect or examine, etc anything in the vehicle (see s 341). (3) A direction may be given to a driver orally or by means of a sign or signal (electronic or otherwise) or in any other way. (4) A direction to a driver ceases to be operative to the extent that a conservation officer— (a) gives the driver or other person a later inconsistent direction; or (b) indicates to the driver that the direction is no longer operative..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 328 page 256 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) However, a conservation officer may direct a vehicle to be stopped only for the amount of time necessary for the conservation officer to exercise the function. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). 328 Offence—fail to comply with stop vehicle direction (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a stop vehicle direction under section 327; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the conservation officer did not produce the conservation officer’s identity card for inspection by the person as soon as practicable after giving the direction. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 329 Urgent directions (1) This section applies if the conservator reasonably believes that a person— (a) has breached, is breaching or is about to breach a nature conservation licence; or (b) has contravened, is contravening or is about to contravene a provision of this Act; or Examples—contravention of provision of Act 1 contravention of an action plan 2 contravention of a native species conservation plan.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 329 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 257 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 3 contravention of a controlled native species management plan Note A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104). (c) has engaged in, is engaging in or is about to engage in conduct that may threaten— (i) a native species that has special protection status; or Note Special protection status—see s 109. (ii) a threatened ecological community; or Note Threatened ecological community—see s 67. (iii) the habitat of— (A) a native species that has protection status; or (B) a threatened ecological community; or (iv) a Ramsar wetland. Note Ramsar wetland—see s 190. (2) The conservator may direct (an urgent direction) the person to— (a) take action to stop the breach, contravention or threat; or (b) cease conduct causing the breach, contravention or threat. (3) An urgent direction must either— (a) state— (i) the action to be taken; and (ii) when the direction must be complied with; or (b) state— (i) the conduct not to be undertaken; and (ii) how long the direction is in force..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 330 page 258 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) An urgent direction must not state a day or time for compliance that is earlier than the day or time the person is given the direction. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). 330 Offence—fail to comply with urgent direction (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to an urgent direction; and (b) fails to take reasonable steps to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the conservation officer did not produce the conservation officer’s identity card for inspection by the person before giving the direction. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58). 331 Conservator’s directions (1) This section applies if— (a) 1 or more of the following is on occupied land: (i) a native species; Note Native species—see s 16. (ii) an ecological community; Note Ecological community—see s 17. (iii) the habitat of a native species or ecological community; and.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 331 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 259 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the conservator reasonably believes that there is conduct that the occupier— (i) may engage in that may threaten the native species, community or habitat; or (ii) could engage in that would promote the protection or conservation of the native species, community or habitat. (2) The conservator may give the occupier a direction about the protection or conservation of the species, community or habitat on the land (a conservator’s direction). (3) A conservator’s direction must not be inconsistent with any of the following that apply to the species, community or habitat: (a) a conservation advice; Note Conservation advice—see s 90C (1). (b) an action plan; Note Action plan, for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process—see s 99. (c) a native species conservation plan; Note Native species conservation plan, for a native species—see s 115. (d) a controlled native species management plan. Note Controlled native species management plan, for a controlled native species—see s 158. (4) A conservator’s direction must— (a) be in writing; and (b) state when the direction must be complied with, being a day at least 14 days after the day the direction is given to the occupier. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 332 page 260 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 332 Offence—fail to comply with conservator’s direction (1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a conservator’s direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. (2) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person is subject to a conservator’s direction; and (b) the direction relates to— (i) a native species that has special protection status; or (ii) a threatened ecological community; or (iii) the habitat of— (A) a native species that has special protection status; or (B) a threatened ecological community; or (iv) a Ramsar wetland; and (c) the person fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units. Note Ramsar wetland—see s 190. Special protection status—see s 109. Threatened ecological community—see s 67. (3) This section does not apply to a person if the person took reasonable steps to comply with the conservator’s direction. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) (see Criminal Code, s 58)..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 333 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 261 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 333 Treatment directions (1) This section applies if the conservator reasonably believes that— (a) a person is keeping a native animal or native plant; and (b) the animal or plant is suffering from a disease; and (c) it is necessary or desirable for a particular kind of treatment to be carried out in connection with the disease. (2) The conservator may direct the keeper of the native animal or native plant to carry out a stated treatment on the animal or plant (a treatment direction). (3) In deciding whether to make a treatment direction, the conservator must consider the following matters: (a) the likelihood of the disease infecting other animals or plants; (b) the impact of the disease if it were to infect other animals or plants; (c) any matter prescribed by regulation; (d) any other matter relevant to the protection or conservation of native animals and native plants. (4) A treatment direction must be in writing and state the following: (a) the native animal or native plant to which it relates; (b) the disease to which it relates; (c) the treatment to be carried out; (d) when the direction must be complied with. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46)..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 334 page 262 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 334 Offence—fail to comply with treatment direction A person commits an offence if the person— (a) is subject to a treatment direction; and (b) fails to comply with the direction. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units. 335 Treatment of animal or plant by Territory (1) This section applies if a person— (a) is subject to a treatment direction; and (b) either— (i) fails to comply with the direction; or (ii) complies with the direction but the native animal or native plant does not respond satisfactorily to the treatment within a reasonable time. (2) The conservator may direct the person to— (a) give the native animal or native plant to the conservator; or (b) destroy the native animal or native plant. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). (3) If the person fails to comply with the direction under subsection (2), the conservator may— (a) enter the premises where the native animal or native plant is kept, with the assistance that the conservator considers necessary; and.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Directions Part 14.1 Section 336 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 263 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) seize the native animal or native plant. Note Premises includes land (whether vacant or occupied), a vessel and a vehicle (see dict). (4) If the conservator seizes a native animal or native plant under subsection (3), the conservator may— (a) carry out the treatment, and dispose of the animal or plant in the way, that the conservator considers appropriate; and (b) recover the reasonable costs of treating and disposing of the animal or plant from the person. Note 1 General powers of entry and seizure are in pt 14.2. Note 2 An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177). 336 Injunctions to restrain contravention of urgent directions and conservator’s directions (1) This section applies if a person (the relevant person) has engaged, is engaging, or proposes to engage, in conduct that was, is, or would be, a contravention of— (a) an urgent direction; or Note Urgent direction—see s 329 (2). (b) a conservator’s direction. Note Conservator’s direction—see s 331 (2). (2) The conservator or anyone else may apply to the Supreme Court for an injunction. (3) On application under subsection (2), the Supreme Court may grant an injunction— (a) restraining the relevant person from engaging in the conduct; and.
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.1 Directions Section 336 page 264 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) if satisfied that it is desirable to do so—requiring the relevant person to do anything. (4) The Supreme Court may grant an injunction restraining a relevant person from engaging in conduct of a particular kind— (a) if satisfied that the person has engaged in conduct of that kind, whether or not it appears to the court that the person intends to engage again, or to continue to engage, in conduct of that kind; or (b) if it appears to the court that, if an injunction is not granted, it is likely the person will engage in conduct of that kind, whether or not the person has previously engaged in conduct of that kind and whether or not there is an imminent danger of substantial damage to someone else if the person engages in conduct of that kind. (5) This section applies whether or not a proceeding for an offence against this chapter has begun or is about to begin..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Definitions—pt 14.2 Division 14.2.1 Section 337 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 265 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.1 Definitions—pt 14.2 337 Definitions—pt 14.2 In this part: connected—a thing is connected with an offence if— (a) the offence has been committed in relation to it; or (b) it will provide evidence of the commission of the offence; or (c) it was used, is being used, or is intended to be used, to commit the offence. occupier, of premises, includes— (a) a person believed on reasonable grounds to be an occupier of the premises; and (b) a person apparently in charge of the premises; and (c) for a vehicle—the driver of the vehicle. offence includes an offence that there are reasonable grounds for believing has been, is being, or will be, committed. warrant means a warrant issued under division 14.2.3 (Search warrants)..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Powers of conservation officers Section 338 page 266 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 14.2.2 Powers of conservation officers 338 Power to enter premises (1) For this Act, a conservation officer may— (a) at any reasonable time, enter premises that the public is entitled to use or that are open to the public (whether or not on payment of money); or Note Premises includes land (whether vacant or occupied), a vehicle, a vessel and an aircraft (see dict). (b) at any time, enter premises with the occupier’s consent; or (c) at any reasonable time, enter premises where an animal or plant is kept under a nature conservation licence; or (d) at any reasonable time, enter premises if the conservation officer suspects that— (i) an animal that is not an exempt animal is on the premises; or (ii) a native plant is on the premises; or (e) enter premises in accordance with a search warrant; or (f) at any time, enter premises if the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that the circumstances are so serious and urgent that immediate entry to the premises without the authority of a search warrant is necessary; or (g) if a vehicle is stopped under section 327—enter the vehicle. (2) However, subsection (1) (a) and (c) do not authorise entry into a part of premises that is being used only for residential purposes. (3) For subsection (1) (f), the conservation officer may enter the premises with any necessary and reasonable assistance and force..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Powers of conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Section 339 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 267 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) A conservation officer may, without the consent of the occupier of premises— (a) if the premises are land—enter the land to ask for consent to remain at the premises; or (b) in any other case—enter land around the premises to ask for consent to enter the premises. (5) To remove any doubt, a conservation officer may enter premises under subsection (1) without payment of an entry fee or other charge. (6) In this section: at any reasonable time includes at any time when the public is entitled to use the premises or when the premises are open to or used by the public (whether or not on payment of money). 339 Production of identity card A conservation officer must not remain at premises entered under this part if the conservation officer does not produce his or her identity card when asked by the occupier. Note Premises includes land (whether vacant or occupied), a vehicle, a vessel and an aircraft (see dict). 340 Consent to entry (1) When seeking the consent of an occupier of premises to enter premises under section 338 (1) (b), a conservation officer must— (a) produce his or her identity card; and (b) tell the occupier— (i) the purpose of the entry; and (ii) that anything found and seized under this part may be used in evidence in court; and (iii) that consent may be refused..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Powers of conservation officers Section 341 page 268 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) If the occupier consents, the conservation officer must ask the occupier to sign a written acknowledgment (an acknowledgment of consent)— (a) that the occupier was told— (i) the purpose of the entry; and (ii) that anything found and seized under this part may be used in evidence in court; and (iii) that consent may be refused; and (b) that the occupier consented to the entry; and (c) stating the time and date when consent was given. (3) If the occupier signs an acknowledgment of consent, the conservation officer must immediately give a copy to the occupier. (4) A court must find that the occupier did not consent to entry to the premises by the conservation officer under this part if— (a) the question arises in a proceeding in the court whether the occupier consented to the entry; and (b) an acknowledgment of consent is not produced in evidence; and (c) it is not proved that the occupier consented to the entry. 341 General powers on entry to premises (1) A conservation officer who enters premises under this part may, for this Act, do 1 or more of the following in relation to the premises or anything on the premises: (a) inspect or examine; (b) take measurements or conduct tests; (c) take samples; (d) take photographs, films or audio, video or other recordings;.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Powers of conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Section 342 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 269 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (e) require the occupier, or anyone at the premises, to give the conservation officer reasonable help to exercise a power under this part. Note 1 Premises includes land (whether vacant or occupied), a vehicle, a vessel and an aircraft (see dict). Note 2 The Legislation Act, s 170 and s 171 deal with the application of the privilege against self-incrimination and client legal privilege. (2) A person must take reasonable steps to comply with a requirement made of the person under subsection (1) (e). Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. 342 Power to seize things (1) A conservation officer who enters premises under this part with the occupier’s consent may seize anything at the premises if— (a) the conservation officer is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the thing is connected with an offence against this Act; and (b) seizure of the thing is consistent with the purpose of the entry told to the occupier when seeking the occupier’s consent. (2) A conservation officer who enters premises under a warrant under this part may seize anything at the premises that the conservation officer is authorised to seize under the warrant. (3) A conservation officer who enters premises under this part (whether with the occupier’s consent, under a warrant or otherwise) may seize anything at the premises if satisfied on reasonable grounds that— (a) the thing is connected with an offence against this Act; and (b) the seizure is necessary to prevent the thing from being— (i) concealed, lost or destroyed; or (ii) used to commit, continue or repeat the offence..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Powers of conservation officers Section 343 page 270 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (4) Also, a conservation officer who enters premises under this part (whether with the occupier’s consent, under a warrant or otherwise) may seize anything at the premises if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the thing poses a risk to the health or safety of people or of damage to property or the environment. (5) The powers of a conservation officer under subsections (3) and (4) are additional to any powers of the conservation officer under subsection (1) or (2) or any other territory law. (6) Having seized a thing, a conservation officer may— (a) remove the thing from the premises where it was seized (the place of seizure) to another place; or (b) leave the thing at the place of seizure but restrict access to it. (7) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person interferes with a seized thing, or anything containing a seized thing, to which access has been restricted under subsection (6); and (b) the person does not have a conservation officer’s approval to interfere with the thing. Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (8) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. 343 Seizure and release of distressed native birds (1) This section applies if— (a) a conservation officer suspects on reasonable grounds that— (i) a person is in possession of a native bird; and (ii) the bird is connected with the commission of an offence against this Act; and.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Powers of conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Section 343 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 271 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the person does not, when asked by the conservation officer, produce for inspection by the conservation officer a nature conservation licence authorising the possession of the bird; and Note Nature conservation licence—see s 262. (c) the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that— (i) the bird is suffering pain or is in a state of distress; or (ii) the keeping of the bird in captivity, or in the kind of captivity in which it is being kept by the person, is likely to endanger the life of, or cause distress or otherwise be harmful to, the bird. (2) The conservation officer may— (a) seize the bird; and (b) if the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that the welfare of the bird is best provided for by releasing the bird—release the bird. Note The Territory may be required to pay the owner of the animal reasonable compensation for its loss (see s 357). (3) However, a conservation officer must not seize or release a bird under subsection (2) if the conservation officer does not produce the conservation officer’s identity card for inspection if asked by the person. (4) In this section: native bird means a bird that is— (a) a native animal; but Note Native animal—see s 12. (b) not an exempt animal. Note Exempt animal—see s 154..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.2 Powers of conservation officers Section 344 page 272 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 344 Release of distressed animals—court orders (1) If the conservator considers that an animal seized under section 342 (Power to seize things) is likely to die or suffer pain or be subjected to distress unless it is released from captivity, the conservator may apply to the Magistrates Court for an order that the animal be released from captivity. (2) An application must clearly state the reasons for seeking the order. (3) An application may only be made before a prosecution is begun for an offence against this Act in relation to the animal or during the prosecution. (4) The court may, before deciding an application, require notice of the application to be given to anyone that the court considers appropriate. (5) On deciding an application, the court may— (a) order that the animal be released from captivity; or (b) dismiss the application. (6) If the court makes an order for the release of an animal— (a) the court may give the directions relating to observations to be made, and records to be kept, about the animal that the court considers appropriate; and (b) the animal must not be released until the directions have been complied with. Note The Territory may be required to pay the owner of the animal reasonable compensation for its loss (see s 357)..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Search warrants Division 14.2.3 Section 345 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 273 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 14.2.3 Search warrants 345 Warrants generally (1) A conservation officer may apply to a magistrate for a warrant to enter premises. (2) The application must be sworn and state the grounds on which the warrant is sought. (3) The magistrate may refuse to consider the application until the conservation officer gives the magistrate all the information the magistrate requires about the application in the way the magistrate requires. (4) The magistrate may issue a warrant only if satisfied there are reasonable grounds for suspecting— (a) there is a particular thing or activity connected with an offence against this Act; and (b) the thing or activity— (i) is, or is being engaged in, at the premises; or (ii) may be, or may be engaged in, at the premises within the next 7 days. (5) The warrant must state— (a) that a conservation officer may, with any necessary assistance and force, enter the premises and exercise the conservation officer’s powers under this part; and (b) the offence for which the warrant is issued; and (c) the things that may be seized under the warrant; and (d) the hours when the premises may be entered; and (e) the date, within 7 days after the day of the warrant’s issue, the warrant ends..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.3 Search warrants Section 346 page 274 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 346 Warrants—application made other than in person (1) A conservation officer may apply for a warrant by phone, fax, email, radio or other form of communication if the conservation officer considers it necessary because of— (a) urgent circumstances; or (b) other special circumstances. (2) Before applying for the warrant, the conservation officer must prepare an application stating the grounds on which the warrant is sought. (3) The conservation officer may apply for the warrant before the application is sworn. (4) After issuing the warrant, the magistrate must immediately provide a written copy to the conservation officer if it is practicable to do so. (5) If it is not practicable to provide a written copy to the conservation officer— (a) the magistrate must tell the conservation officer— (i) the terms of the warrant; and (ii) the date and time the warrant was issued; and (b) the conservation officer must complete a form of warrant (the warrant form) and write on it— (i) the magistrate’s name; and (ii) the date and time the magistrate issued the warrant; and (iii) the warrant’s terms. (6) The written copy of the warrant, or the warrant form properly completed by the conservation officer, authorises the entry and the exercise of the conservation officer’s powers under this part..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Search warrants Division 14.2.3 Section 347 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 275 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (7) The conservation officer must, at the first reasonable opportunity, send to the magistrate— (a) the sworn application; and (b) if the conservation officer completed a warrant form—the completed warrant form. (8) On receiving the documents, the magistrate must attach them to the warrant. (9) A court must find that a power exercised by the conservation officer was not authorised by a warrant under this section if— (a) the question arises in a proceeding in the court whether the exercise of power was authorised by a warrant; and (b) the warrant is not produced in evidence; and (c) it is not proved that the exercise of power was authorised by a warrant under this section. 347 Search warrants—announcement before entry (1) A conservation officer must, before anyone enters premises under a search warrant— (a) announce that the conservation officer is authorised to enter the premises; and (b) give anyone at the premises an opportunity to allow entry to the premises; and (c) if the occupier of the premises, or someone else who apparently represents the occupier, is present at the premises—identify himself or herself to the person..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.3 Search warrants Section 348 page 276 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) The conservation officer is not required to comply with subsection (1) if the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that immediate entry to the premises is required to ensure— (a) the safety of anyone (including the conservation officer or any person assisting); or (b) that the effective execution of the warrant is not frustrated. 348 Details of search warrant to be given to occupier etc If the occupier of premises, or someone else who apparently represents the occupier, is present at the premises while a search warrant is being executed, the conservation officer or a person assisting must make available to the person— (a) a copy of the warrant; and (b) a document setting out the rights and obligations of the person. 349 Occupier entitled to be present during search etc (1) If the occupier of premises, or someone else who apparently represents the occupier, is present at the premises while a search warrant is being executed, the person is entitled to observe the search being conducted. (2) However, the person is not entitled to observe the search if— (a) to do so would impede the search; or (b) the person is under arrest, and allowing the person to observe the search being conducted would interfere with the objectives of the search. (3) This section does not prevent 2 or more areas of the premises being searched at the same time..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Return and forfeiture of things seized Division 14.2.4 Section 350 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 277 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 14.2.4 Return and forfeiture of things seized 350 Receipt for things seized (1) As soon as practicable after a conservation officer seizes a thing under this part, the conservation officer must give a receipt for it to the person from whom it was seized. (2) If, for any reason, it is not practicable to comply with subsection (1), the conservation officer must leave the receipt, secured conspicuously, at the place of seizure under section 342 (Power to seize things). (3) A receipt under this section must include the following: (a) a description of the thing seized; (b) an explanation of why the thing was seized; (c) the conservation officer’s name, and how to contact the conservation officer; (d) if the thing is moved from the premises where it is seized— (i) where the thing is to be taken; or (ii) if the thing seized is a living animal—how the animal is to be kept. 351 Moving things to another place for examination or processing under search warrant (1) A thing found at premises entered under a search warrant may be moved to another place for examination or processing to decide whether it may be seized under the warrant if— (a) both of the following apply: (i) there are reasonable grounds for believing that the thing is or contains something to which the warrant relates;.
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.4 Return and forfeiture of things seized Section 352 page 278 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) it is significantly more practicable to do so having regard to the timeliness and cost of examining the thing at another place and the availability of expert assistance; or (b) the occupier of the premises agrees in writing. (2) The thing may be moved to another place for examination for not longer than 72 hours. (3) A conservation officer may apply to a magistrate for an extension of time if the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that the thing cannot be examined within 72 hours. (4) The conservation officer must give notice of the application to the occupier of the premises, and the occupier is entitled to be heard on the application. (5) If a thing is moved to another place under this section, the conservation officer must, if practicable— (a) tell the occupier of the premises the address of the place where, and time when, the examination or processing will be carried out; and (b) allow the occupier or the occupier’s representative to be present during the examination or processing. (6) The provisions of this part relating to the issue of search warrants apply, with any necessary changes, to the giving of an extension under this section. 352 Access to things seized A person who would, apart from the seizure, be entitled to inspect a thing seized under this part may— (a) inspect it; and (b) if it is a document—take extracts from it or make copies of it..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Return and forfeiture of things seized Division 14.2.4 Section 353 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 279 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 353 Return of things seized (1) A thing seized under this part must be returned to its owner, or reasonable compensation must be paid to the owner by the Territory for the loss of the thing, unless— (a) a prosecution for an offence against a territory law in connection with the thing is begun within 1 year after the day the seizure is made and the thing is required to be produced in evidence in the prosecution; or (b) an application for the forfeiture of the seized thing is made to a court under the Confiscation of Criminal Assets Act 2003 or another territory law within 1 year after the day the seizure is made; or (c) all proceedings in relation to the offence with which the seizure was connected have ended and the court has not made an order about the thing. (2) However, this section does not apply to a thing— (a) if the conservator believes on reasonable grounds that the only practical use of the thing in relation to the premises where it was seized would be an offence against this Act; or (b) if possession of it by its owner would be an offence. 354 Forfeiture of things seized (1) This section applies if— (a) a thing seized under this part has not been— (i) released under— (A) section 343 (Seizure and release of distressed native birds); or (B) section 344 (Release of distressed animals—court orders); or.
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.4 Return and forfeiture of things seized Section 355 page 280 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (ii) returned under section 353; and (b) an application for disallowance of the seizure under section 356— (i) has not been made within 10 days after the day of the seizure; or (ii) has been made within the 10-day period, but the application has been refused or withdrawn before a decision in relation to the application had been made. (2) The thing seized— (a) is forfeited to the Territory; and (b) may be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the conservator directs. 355 Power to destroy unsafe things (1) This section applies to anything inspected or seized under this part by a conservation officer if the conservation officer is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the thing poses a risk to the health or safety of people or of damage to property or the environment. (2) The conservation officer may direct a person in charge of the premises where the thing is to destroy or otherwise dispose of the thing. Note The power to make a direction includes the power to amend or repeal the direction. The power to amend or repeal the direction is exercisable in the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as the power to make the direction (see Legislation Act, s 46). (3) The direction may state 1 or more of the following: (a) how the thing must be destroyed or otherwise disposed of; (b) how the thing must be kept until it is destroyed or otherwise disposed of;.
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Return and forfeiture of things seized Division 14.2.4 Section 356 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 281 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the period within which the thing must be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. (4) A person in charge of the premises where the thing is commits an offence if the person contravenes a direction given to the person under subsection (2). Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units. (5) Alternatively, if the thing has been seized under this part, the conservation officer may destroy or otherwise dispose of the thing. (6) Costs incurred by the Territory in relation to the disposal of a thing under subsection (5) are a debt owing to the Territory by, and are recoverable together and separately from, the following people: (a) the person who owned the thing; (b) each person in control of the premises where the thing was. Note An amount owing under a law may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction or the ACAT (see Legislation Act, s 177). (7) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence. 356 Application for order disallowing seizure (1) A person claiming to be entitled to anything seized under this part may apply to the Magistrates Court within 10 days after the day of the seizure for an order disallowing the seizure. (2) The application may be heard only if the applicant has served a copy of the application on the conservator. (3) The conservator is entitled to appear as respondent at the hearing of the application..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.4 Return and forfeiture of things seized Section 357 page 282 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 357 Order for return of things seized (1) This section applies if a person claiming to be entitled to anything seized under this part applies to the Magistrates Court under section 356 for an order disallowing the seizure. (2) The Magistrates Court must make an order disallowing the seizure if satisfied that— (a) the applicant would, apart from the seizure, be entitled to the return of the thing seized; and (b) the thing is not connected with an offence against this Act; and (c) possession of the thing by the person would not be an offence. (3) The Magistrates Court may also make an order disallowing the seizure if satisfied there are exceptional circumstances justifying the making of the order. (4) If the Magistrates Court makes an order disallowing the seizure, the court may make 1 or more of the following ancillary orders: (a) an order directing the conservator to return the thing to the applicant or to someone else who appears to be entitled to it; (b) if the thing cannot be returned or has depreciated in value because of the seizure—an order directing the Territory to pay reasonable compensation; (c) an order about the payment of costs in relation to the application..
Enforcement Chapter 14 Enforcement by conservation officers Part 14.2 Enforcement—damage and compensation Division 14.2.5 Section 358 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 283 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Division 14.2.5 Enforcement—damage and compensation 358 Damage etc to be minimised (1) In the exercise, or purported exercise, of a function under this part, a conservation officer must take all reasonable steps to ensure that the officer causes as little inconvenience, detriment and damage as practicable. (2) If a conservation officer damages anything in the exercise or purported exercise of a function under this part, the conservation officer must give written notice of the particulars of the damage to the person the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds is the owner of the thing. (3) The notice must state that— (a) the person may claim compensation from the Territory if the person suffers loss or expense because of the damage; and (b) compensation may be claimed and ordered in a proceeding for compensation brought in a court of competent jurisdiction; and (c) the court may order the payment of reasonable compensation for the loss or expense only if satisfied it is just to make the order in the circumstances of the particular case. (4) If the damage happens at premises entered under this part in the absence of the occupier, the notice may be given by leaving it, secured conspicuously, at the premises..
Chapter 14 Enforcement Part 14.2 Enforcement by conservation officers Division 14.2.5 Enforcement—damage and compensation Section 359 page 284 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 359 Compensation for exercise of enforcement powers (1) A person may claim compensation from the Territory if the person suffers loss or expense because of the exercise, or purported exercise, of a function under this part by a conservation officer. (2) Compensation may be claimed and ordered in a proceeding for— (a) compensation brought in a court of competent jurisdiction; or (b) an offence against this Act brought against the person making the claim for compensation. (3) A court may order the payment of reasonable compensation for the loss or expense only if satisfied it is just to make the order in the circumstances of the particular case. (4) A regulation may prescribe matters that may, must or must not be taken into account by the court in considering whether it is just to make the order..
Notification and review of decisions Chapter 15 Section 360 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 285 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 15 Notification and review of decisions 360 Meaning of reviewable decision—ch 15 In this chapter: reviewable decision means a decision mentioned in schedule 1, column 3 under a provision of this Act mentioned in column 2 in relation to the decision. 361 Reviewable decision notices If the conservator makes a reviewable decision, the conservator must give a reviewable decision notice to each entity mentioned in schedule 1, column 4 in relation to the decision. Note 1 The conservator must also take reasonable steps to give a reviewable decision notice to any other person whose interests are affected by the decision (see ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, s 67A). Note 2 The requirements for a reviewable decision notice are prescribed under the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008. 362 Applications for review The following may apply to the ACAT for review of a reviewable decision: (a) an entity mentioned in schedule 1, column 4 in relation to the decision; (b) any other person whose interests are affected by the decision. Note If a form is approved under the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 for the application, the form must be used..
Chapter 16 Miscellaneous Section 363 page 286 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Chapter 16 Miscellaneous 363 Certain information may be kept confidential (1) This section applies if a relevant person— (a) is preparing a document under this Act; and (b) considers that the survival of a native species or ecological community may be threatened by the disclosure of the precise location of— (i) the species, or community, in the wild; or (ii) if the species or community has a known critical habitat— the critical habitat for the species or community. (2) It is sufficient compliance with this Act if only a general description of the location of the species, community or habitat is included in the document. (3) In this section: relevant person means— (a) the Minister; or (b) the conservator; or (c) the scientific committee. 364 Offences—use or divulge protected information (1) A person to whom this section applies commits an offence if— (a) the person uses information; and (b) the information is protected information about someone else; and.
Miscellaneous Chapter 16 Section 364 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 287 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (c) the person is reckless about whether the information is protected information about someone else. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units, imprisonment for 6 months or both. (2) A person to whom this section applies commits an offence if— (a) the person does something that divulges information; and (b) the information is protected information about someone else; and (c) the person is reckless about whether— (i) the information is protected information about someone else; and (ii) doing the thing would result in the information being divulged to someone else. Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units, imprisonment for 6 months or both. (3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to a person if the information is used or divulged— (a) under this Act or another territory law; or (b) in relation to the exercise of a function, as a person to whom this section applies, under this Act or another territory law; or (c) in a court proceeding. (4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to the using or divulging of protected information about a person with the person’s consent. Note The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mentioned in s (3) and s (4) (see Criminal Code, s 58)..
Chapter 16 Miscellaneous Section 365 page 288 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (5) A person to whom this section applies need not divulge protected information to a court, or produce a document containing protected information to a court, unless it is necessary to do so for this Act or another law applying in the territory. (6) In this section: court includes a tribunal, authority or person having power to require the production of documents or the answering of questions. divulge includes— (a) communicate; or (b) publish. person to whom this section applies means— (a) a person who is or has been the conservator; or (b) a person who is or has been a conservation officer; or (c) anyone else who has exercised a function under this Act. produce includes allow access to. protected information means information about a person that is disclosed to, or obtained by, a person to whom this section applies because of the exercise of a function under this Act by the person or someone else. use information includes make a record of the information. 365 Acts and omissions of representatives (1) This section applies to a prosecution for any offence against this Act. (2) If it is relevant to prove a person’s state of mind about an act or omission, it is enough to show— (a) the act was done or omission made by a representative of the person within the scope of the representative’s actual or apparent authority; and.
Miscellaneous Chapter 16 Section 366 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 289 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (b) the representative had the state of mind. (3) An act done or omitted to be done on behalf of a person by a representative of the person within the scope of the representative’s actual or apparent authority is also taken to have been done or omitted to be done by the person. (4) However, subsection (3) does not apply to a person if the person establishes that reasonable precautions were taken and appropriate diligence was exercised to avoid the act or omission. (5) A person who is convicted of an offence cannot be punished by imprisonment for the offence if the person would not have been convicted of the offence without subsection (2) or (3). (6) In this section: person means an individual. Note See the Criminal Code, pt 2.5 for provisions about corporate criminal responsibility. representative, of a person, means an employee or agent of the person. state of mind, of a person, includes— (a) the person’s knowledge, intention, opinion, belief or purpose; and (b) the person’s reasons for the intention, opinion, belief or purpose. 366 Criminal liability of executive officers (1) An executive officer of a corporation commits an offence if— (a) the corporation contravenes a provision of this Act; and (b) the contravention is an offence against this Act (a relevant offence); and (c) the officer was reckless about whether the contravention would happen; and.
Chapter 16 Miscellaneous Section 366 page 290 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (d) the officer was in a position to influence the conduct of the corporation in relation to the contravention; and (e) the officer failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent the contravention. Maximum penalty: The maximum penalty that may be imposed for the commission of the relevant offence by an individual. (2) This section applies whether or not the corporation is prosecuted for, or convicted of, the relevant offence. (3) In deciding whether the executive officer took (or failed to take) reasonable steps to prevent the contravention, a court must have regard to the following: (a) any action the officer took directed towards ensuring the following (to the extent that the action is relevant to the act or omission): (i) that the corporation arranges regular professional assessments of the corporation’s compliance with the contravened provision; (ii) that the corporation implements any appropriate recommendation arising from such an assessment; (iii) that the corporation’s employees, agents and contractors have a reasonable knowledge and understanding of the requirement to comply with the contravened provision; (b) any action the officer took when the officer became aware that the contravention was, or might be, about to happen. (4) Subsection (3) does not limit the matters to which the court may have regard. (5) This section does not apply if the corporation would have a defence to a prosecution for the relevant offence..
Miscellaneous Chapter 16 Section 367 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 291 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (6) In this section: executive officer, of a corporation, means a person, however described and whether or not the person is a director of the corporation, who is concerned with, or takes part in, the corporation’s management. 367 Evidentiary certificates (1) The conservator may give a signed certificate— (a) stating that on a stated date, or during a stated period, a stated person was or was not a licensee; and (b) if the person was a licensee—including details of the person’s nature conservation licence. (2) A certificate under this section is evidence of the matters stated in it. (3) Unless the contrary is proved, a document that purports to be a certificate under this section is taken to be a certificate. 368 Determination of fees etc (1) The Minister may determine— (a) fees for this Act; and (b) the annual percentage rate at which interest payable under section 284 (4) (Financial assurance condition—recovery of extra costs) is to be calculated; and (c) the annual percentage rate at which interest accruing under section 285 (1) (a) (Financial assurance condition—money held by Territory) is to be calculated. Note The Legislation Act contains provisions about the making of determinations and regulations relating to fees, charges and other amounts (see pt 6.3)..
Chapter 16 Miscellaneous Section 370 page 292 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (2) A determination is a disallowable instrument. Note A disallowable instrument must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. 370 Regulation-making power (1) The Executive may make regulations for this Act. Note A regulation must be notified, and presented to the Legislative Assembly, under the Legislation Act. (2) A regulation may create offences and fix maximum penalties of not more than 30 penalty units for the offences. 371 Review of Act The Minister must review the operation of this Act and present a report of the review to the Legislative Assembly as soon as practicable after the end of this Act’s 10th year of operation. Note A reference to an Act includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under the Act, including any regulation (see Legislation Act, s 104)..
Reviewable decisions Schedule 1 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 293 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Schedule 1 Reviewable decisions (see ch 15) column 1 item column 2 section column 3 decision column 4 entity 1 226 (2) issue restore excavation direction person directed 2 229 (2) issue repair damage direction person directed 3 273 (2) issue nature conservation licence 4 273 (2) refuse to issue nature conservation licence applicant for licence 5 274 (b) issue nature conservation licence—impose condition licensee 6 279 impose financial assurance condition on nature conservation licence licensee 7 282 claim a financial assurance licensee 8 286 (1) amend nature conservation licence licensee 9 288 (2) refuse to amend nature conservation licence licensee 10 288 (3) amend nature conservation licence— impose or amend condition licensee 11 290 (2) refuse to transfer nature conservation licence licensee proposed new licensee 12 290 (3) transfer nature conservation licence— impose or amend condition new licensee 13 292 (2) refuse to renew nature conservation licence licensee 14 292 (3) renew nature conservation licence— impose or amend condition licensee 15 299 (3) take regulatory action licensee 16 300 immediately suspend nature conservation licence licensee 17 331 (2) issue conservator’s direction person directed.
Schedule 1 Reviewable decisions page 294 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au column 1 item column 2 section column 3 decision column 4 entity 18 333 (2) issue treatment direction person directed 19 335 (2) (a) issue direction to give animal or plant to conservator person directed 20 335 (2) (b) issue direction to destroy animal or plant person directed 21 355 (2) issue direction to destroy or otherwise dispose of a thing person directed.
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 295 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Dictionary (see s 3) Note 1 The Legislation Act contains definitions and other provisions relevant to this Act. Note 2 For example, the Legislation Act, dict, pt 1, defines the following terms: • ACAT • ACT legislation register • ambulance service • Australia • chief officer (ambulance service) • chief officer (fire and rescue service) • chief officer (rural fire service) • chief officer (SES) • commissioner for sustainability and the environment • contravene • director-general (see s 163) • disallowable instrument (see s 9) • Executive • exercise • external territory • fire and rescue service • function • notifiable instrument (see s 10) • penalty unit (see s 133) • police officer • reviewable decision notice • rural fire service • SES • State • the Territory • working day..
Dictionary page 296 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au accessing biological resources, for part 8.5 (Access to biological resources in reserves)—see section 207. access provider, for biological resources in a reserve, for part 8.5 (Access to biological resources in reserves)—see section 206. action plan, for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process, for part 4.5 (Action plans)—see section 99. activities, of an agency, for chapter 12 (Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others)—see section 308. activities declaration, for a reserve—see section 256. activity information notice, for an activity—see section 270. ACT parks and conservation service means the ACT parks and conservation service established under section 27. agency, for chapter 12 (Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others)—see section 308. animal—see section 11. animal reproductive material means— (a) an embryo, an egg or sperm of an animal; or (b) any other part, or product, of an animal from which another animal could be produced. assessed at a national scale, for an item, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in a list)—see section 80. biodiversity—see section 19. biodiversity research and monitoring program, for part 2.1 (Conservator of flora and fauna)—see section 24. biodiversity research and monitoring program report—see section 26. biological resources, for part 8.5 (Access to biological resources in reserves)—see section 204..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 297 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au built-up urban area, for division 6.1.3 (Native plants)—see section 139. cause, serious harm or material harm— (a) for part 9.4 (Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation)—see section 235; and (b) for part 9.5 (Reserves—offences about damaging land)—see section 244. clearing native vegetation, for part 9.4 (Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation)—see section 234. closed reserve declaration, for a reserve, for part 10.2 (Prohibited and restricted activities)—see section 259. coastal sea, of Australia or an external Territory—see the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cwlth), section 15B (4) (Application of Acts in coastal sea). common assessment method, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in a list—general)—see section 80. connected, for part 14.2 (Enforcement by conservation officers)— see section 337. conservation—see section 10. conservation advice means an advice mentioned in section 90C. conservation dependent species means a species included in the conservation dependent category in the threatened native species list. conservation officer means a conservation officer mentioned in section 28. conservator—see section 20. conservator guidelines—see section 23. conservator’s direction—see section 331 (2)..
Dictionary page 298 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au continental shelf—see the Seas and Submerged Lands Act 1973 (Cwlth), section 3. controlled native species, for chapter 7 (Controlled native species management plans)—see section 157. controlled native species management plan, for a controlled native species—see section 158. critical habitat, for a species or ecological community, means a habitat that is critical to the survival of the species or ecological community. critically endangered ecological community means an ecological community included in the critically endangered category in the threatened ecological communities list. critically endangered species means a species included in the critically endangered category in the threatened native species list. cultural resource management plan—see section 168A. custodian, for an area of land—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 333 (What is a custodian?). Note Custodian only applies to land that is unleased land or public land. damage— (a) a tree, for division 6.1.3 (Native plants)—see section 139; and (b) to land, for part 9.5 (Reserves—offences about damaging land)—see section 243. data deficient species means a species included in the data deficient category on the protected native species list. development, for chapter 13 (Land development applications)—see section 315. draft action plan, for a relevant species, relevant ecological community or key threatening process, for part 4.5 (Action plans)— see section 100..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 299 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au draft controlled native species management plan, for a controlled native species, for chapter 7 (Controlled native species management plans)—see section 159. draft native species conservation plan, for a native species on stated land, for part 5.3 (Native species conservation plans)—see section 116. draft nature conservation strategy, for the ACT, for chapter 3 (Nature conservation strategy for the ACT)—see section 48. draft Ramsar wetland management plan, for a Ramsar wetland, for part 8.4 (Ramsar wetlands management plans)—see section 192. draft reserve management plan, for a reserve, for part 8.3 (Reserve management plans)—see section 176. due date— (a) for when the financial assurance must be provided—see section 280; and (b) for when a proposed management agreement is to be signed and returned to the conservator—see section 311. ecological community—see section 17. ecosystem means a dynamic complex of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit. eligible species—see section 95 (1). endangered ecological community means an ecological community included in the endangered category in the threatened ecological communities list. endangered species means a species included in the endangered category in the threatened native species list. evidence direction—see section 319 (3)..
Dictionary page 300 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au exclusive economic zone—see the Seas and Submerged Lands Act 1973 (Cwlth), section 3. exempt animal—see section 154. export an item, means take the item to another place for any purpose. Examples—purpose • sale or trade • personal use • gift financial assurance condition, on a licence—see section 278. financial assurance considerations—see section 279. fisheries management plan—see the Fisheries Act 2000, section 5. genetic resources, for part 8.5 (Access to biological resources in reserves)—see section 205. ground for regulatory action, against a licensee—see section 297. habitat means an area— (a) occupied (continuously, periodically or occasionally) by an organism or group of organisms; or (b) once occupied (continuously, periodically or occasionally) by an organism, or group of organisms, and into which organisms of that kind have the potential to be reintroduced. import an item, means bring in the item from another place for any purpose. Examples—purpose • sale or trade • personal use • gift in, a vehicle, includes on the vehicle. ineligible species—see section 95 (1)..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 301 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au influential person, for a corporation, for chapter 11 (Nature conservation licences)—see section 262A. information direction—see section 323 (2). inspection notice, for a licence—see section 272. interfere with an item, for division 6.1.2 (Native animals)—see section 127. item, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)— see section 80. IUCN category, for a reserve, for part 8.2 (IUCN categories for reserves)—see section 171. IUCN reserve management objectives, for an IUCN category, for part 8.2 (IUCN categories for reserves)—see section 173. keep, an animal, means have charge or possession of the animal, either in captivity or in a domesticated state. key threatening process—see section 74. key threatening processes list—see section 75. key threatening processes list criteria—see section 78. lease—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 235. leave reserve direction, for part 14.1 (Directions)—see section 325 (2). licence means a nature conservation licence. licence number, for a licence—see section 277. licence register—see section 304. licensed activity, for a licence—see section 262. list, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)— see section 80..
Dictionary page 302 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au listed migratory species—see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), section 528. listing assessment, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 85 (2). management agreement, for public land or unleased territory land, for chapter 12 (Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others)—see section 310. management objectives, for public land or unleased territory land, for chapter 12 (Management agreements with utility suppliers, land developers and others)—see section 309. material harm, to a reserve— (a) for clearing native vegetation, for part 9.4 (Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation)—see section 235; or (b) for damage to land, for part 9.5 (Reserves—offences about damaging land)—see section 244. member— (a) for a species of animal—see section 18 (a); or (b) for a species of plant—see section 18 (b); or (c) for an ecological community—see section 18 (c). minor amendment, for division 4.4.6 (Minor amendments of list)— see section 93. motor vehicle—see the Road Transport (General) Act 1999, dictionary. name and address direction—see section 319 (2). national category, in the threatened native species list—see section 63 (2) (Threatened native species list—categories)..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 303 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au nationally threatened, in relation to an item, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 80. native animal—see section 12. native plant—see section 14. native species—see section 16. native species conservation plan, for a native species—see section 115. native timber, for division 6.1.3 (Native plants)—see section 139. native tree, for division 6.1.3 (Native plants)—see section 139. native vegetation, for an area, for part 9.4 (Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation)—see section 232. native vegetation area, for part 9.4 (Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation)—see section 233. nature—see section 9. nature conservation licence—see section 262. nature conservation strategy, for the ACT—see section 47. nest, of an animal, for division 6.1.2 (Native animals)—see section 127. nomination, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 80. occupier, of premises, for part 14.2 (Enforcement by conservation officers)—see section 337. offence, for part 14.2 (Enforcement by conservation officers)—see section 337..
Dictionary page 304 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au organism includes— (a) a virus; and (b) the reproductive material of an organism; and (c) an organism that has died. participating State, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 80. personal information notice—see section 267. pest animal—see the Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005, dictionary. pest plant—see the Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005, dictionary. planning and development management objectives, for an area of public land, means the management objectives under the Planning and Development Act 2007, section 317 (Management objectives for areas of public land). Note The management objectives are stated in the following: • the Planning and Development Act 2007, sch 3; • determinations made by the conservator under the Planning and Development Act 2007, s 317 (2). plant—see section 13. plant reproductive material means— (a) a seed or spore of a plant; or (b) a cutting from a plant; or (c) any other part, or product, of a plant from which another plant can be produced. plant tag, for a plant, for division 6.1.3 (Native plants)—see section 139. population, of a species or ecological community, means an occurrence of the species or community in a particular area..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 305 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au premises includes— (a) land (whether vacant or occupied); and (b) a vehicle; and (c) a vessel; and (d) an aircraft. prohibited activity, for a reserve—see section 256. proposed agreement—see section 311. proposed new licensee, for a licence—see section 289. protected native species—see section 110. protected native species list—see section 111 (1). protected native species list criteria—see section 113 (1). public consultation notice, for a nomination, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 84 (1). public consultation period— (a) for a draft action plan, for part 4.5 (Action plans)—see section 103 (2); and (b) for a draft controlled native animal management plan, for chapter 7 (Controlled native species management plans)—see section 162 (2); and (c) for a draft native species conservation plan, for part 5.3 (Native species conservation plans)—see section 120 (2); and (d) for a draft nature conservation strategy, for chapter 3 (Nature conservation strategy for the ACT)—see section 51 (2); and (e) for a draft Ramsar wetland management plan, for part 8.4 (Ramsar wetlands management plans)—see section 195 (2); and.
Dictionary page 306 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au (f) for a draft reserve management plan, for part 8.3 (Reserve management plans)—see section 179 (2); and (g) for a nomination, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 84 (3). public land—see the Planning and Development Act 2007, dictionary. public unleased land permit—see the Public Unleased Land Act 2013, section 40. Ramsar wetland—see section 190. Ramsar wetland management plan, for a Ramsar wetland—see section 191. rare species means a species included in the rare category on the protected native species list. regional category, in the threatened native species list—see section 63 (3) (Threatened native species list—categories). regionally conservation dependent species means a species included in the regionally conservation dependent category in the threatened native species list. regionally threatened species means a species included in the regionally threatened category in the threatened native species list. regular migratory species—see section 98. regulatory action, against a licensee—see section 298. relevant ecological community—see section 98. relevant species—see section 98. repair damage direction, for part 9.3 (Reserves—repairing damage)—see section 229 (2). reserve—see section 169..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 307 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au reserve management plan, for a reserve, for part 8.3 (Reserve management plans)—see section 175. resource protection area, for chapter 10 (Reserves—prohibited and restricted activities)—see section 253. resource protection area declaration, for a resource protection area—see section 254. restore excavation direction, for part 9.2 (Reserves—offences in wilderness areas)—see section 226 (2). restricted activity, for a reserve—see section 256. restricted trade species means a species included in the restricted trade category on the protected native species list. reviewable decision, for chapter 15 (Notification and review of decisions)—see section 360. risk management plan notice, for a licence—see section 271. scientific committee means the scientific committee established under section 31. seabed includes— (a) the surface of a coral formation; and (b) subsoil of seabed (including coral beneath the surface of a coral formation). sell, for part 6.1 (Offences)—see section 126. serious harm, to a reserve— (a) for clearing native vegetation, for part 9.4 (Reserves—offences about clearing native vegetation)—see section 235; or (b) for damage to land, for part 9.5 (Reserves—offences about damaging land)—see section 244. show cause notice, for a licensee, for part 11.6 (Licences—regulatory action)—see section 299..
Dictionary page 308 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au special protection status, for a native species—see section 109. species—see section 15. stop vehicle direction, for part 14.1 (Directions)—see section 327 (2). suitability information— (a) about an activity—see section 269; or (b) about a person—see section 266. suitable activity, for a licence—see section 268. suitable person, to hold a licence, for chapter 11 (Nature conservation licences)—see section 265. take, for part 6.1 (Offences)—see section 126. threatened ecological communities list—see section 68. threatened ecological communities list criteria—see section 71. threatened ecological community—see section 67. threatened native species—see section 61. threatened native species list—see section 62. threatened native species list criteria—see section 65. threatening process—see section 73. transfer, an item within a list, for part 4.4 (Including, transferring and omitting items in list)—see section 80. treatment direction, for part 14.1 (Directions)—see section 333. tree seedling, for division 6.1.3 (Native plants)—see section 139. urgent direction, for part 14.1 (Directions)—see section 329. vehicle includes vessel. vessel includes hovercraft..
Dictionary R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 309 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au vulnerable ecological community means an ecological community included in the vulnerable category in the threatened ecological communities list. vulnerable species means a species included in the vulnerable category in the threatened native species list. warrant, for part 14.2 (Enforcement by conservation officers)—see section 337. wilderness area—see section 170..
Endnotes 1 About the endnotes page 310 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Endnotes 1 About the endnotes Amending and modifying laws are annotated in the legislation history and the amendment history. Current modifications are not included in the republished law but are set out in the endnotes. Not all editorial amendments made under the Legislation Act 2001, part 11.3 are annotated in the amendment history. Full details of any amendments can be obtained from the Parliamentary Counsel’s Office. Uncommenced amending laws are not included in the republished law. The details of these laws are underlined in the legislation history. Uncommenced expiries are underlined in the legislation history and amendment history. If all the provisions of the law have been renumbered, a table of renumbered provisions gives details of previous and current numbering. The endnotes also include a table of earlier republications. 2 Abbreviation key A = Act NI = Notifiable instrument AF = Approved form o = order am = amended om = omitted/repealed amdt = amendment ord = ordinance AR = Assembly resolution orig = original ch = chapter par = paragraph/subparagraph CN = Commencement notice pres = present def = definition prev = previous DI = Disallowable instrument (prev...) = previously dict = dictionary pt = part disallowed = disallowed by the Legislative r = rule/subrule Assembly reloc = relocated div = division renum = renumbered exp = expires/expired R[X] = Republication No Gaz = gazette RI = reissue hdg = heading s = section/subsection IA = Interpretation Act 1967 sch = schedule ins = inserted/added sdiv = subdivision LA = Legislation Act 2001 SL = Subordinate law LR = legislation register sub = substituted LRA = Legislation (Republication) Act 1996 underlining = whole or part not commenced mod = modified/modification or to be expired.
Endnotes Legislation history 3 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 311 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 3 Legislation history Nature Conservation Act 2014 A2014-59 notified LR 11 December 2014 s 1, s 2 commenced 11 December 2014 (LA s 75 (1)) ch 13, dict def development commenced 11 June 2015 (s 2 (2) (b)) remainder commenced 11 June 2015 (s 2 (1) and LA s 79) as modified by Nature Conservation (Transitional Provisions) Regulation 2015 SL2015-26 s 5 notified LR 9 July 2015 s 1, s 2 commenced 9 July 2015 (LA s 75 (1)) s 5 commenced 10 July 2015 (s 2) as amended by Red Tape Reduction Legislation Amendment Act 2015 A2015-33 sch 1 pt 1.46, sch 3 pt 3.2 notified LR 30 September 2015 s 1, s 2 commenced 30 September 2015 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 1 pt 1.46, sch 3 pt 3.2 commenced 14 October 2015 (s 2) Planning, Building and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2016 A2016-2 pt 6 notified LR 23 February 2016 s 1, s 2 commenced 23 February 2016 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 6 commenced 24 February 2016 (s 2) Red Tape Reduction Legislation Amendment Act 2016 A2016-18 sch 3 pt 3.31 notified LR 13 April 2016 s 1, s 2 commenced 13 April 2016 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 3 pt 3.31 commenced 27 April 2016 (s 2) Planning, Building and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2016 (No 2) A2016-24 pt 8 notified LR 11 May 2016 s 1, s 2 commenced 11 May 2016 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 8 commenced 12 May 2016 (s 2 (1)).
Endnotes 3 Legislation history page 312 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Nature Conservation Amendment Act 2016 A2016-29 notified LR 16 June 2016 s 1, s 2 commenced 16 June 2016 (LA s 75 (1)) remainder commenced 17 June 2016 (s 2) Emergencies Amendment Act 2016 A2016-33 sch 1 pt 1.15 notified LR 20 June 2016 s 1, s 2 commenced 20 June 2016 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 1 pt 1.15 commenced 21 June 2016 (s 2) Planning, Building and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2017 A2017-3 pt 4 notified LR 22 February 2017 s 1, s 2 commenced 22 February 2017 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 4 commenced 23 February 2017 (s 2) Statute Law Amendment Act 2017 A2017-4 sch 3 pt 3.19 notified LR 23 February 2017 s 1, s 2 commenced 23 February 2017 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 3 pt 3.19 commenced 9 March 2017 (s 2) Planning, Building and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2017 (No 2) A2017-20 pt 8 notified LR 15 June 2017 s 1, s 2 commenced 15 June 2017 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 8 commenced 16 June 2017 (s 2) Nature Conservation (Minor Public Works) Amendment Act 2017 A2017-39 notified LR 13 November 2017 s 1, s 2 commenced 13 November 2017 (LA s 75 (1)) remainder commenced 14 November 2017 (s 2) Planning, Building and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2018 A2018-18 pt 4 notified LR 16 May 2018 s 1, s 2 commenced 16 May 2018 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 4 commenced 17 May 2018 (s 2).
Endnotes Legislation history 3 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 313 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Veterinary Practice Act 2018 A2018-32 sch 3 pt 3.13 notified LR 30 August 2018 s 1, s 2 commenced 30 August 2018 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 3 pt 3.13 commenced 21 December 2018 (s 2 and CN2018-12) Red Tape Reduction Legislation Amendment Act 2018 A2018-33 pt 9, sch 1 pt 1.26 notified LR 25 September 2018 s 1, s 2 commenced 25 September 2018 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 9 commenced 2 October 2018 (s 2 (1)) sch 1 pt 1.26 commenced 23 October 2018 (s 2 (4)) Statute Law Amendment Act 2018 A2018-42 sch 3 pt 3.25 notified LR 8 November 2018 s 1, s 2 taken to have commenced 1 July 2018 (LA s 75 (2)) sch 3 pt 3.25 commenced 22 November 2018 (s 2 (1)) Planning and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2019 A2019-20 pt 5 notified LR 8 August 2019 s 1, s 2 commenced 8 August 2019 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 5 commenced 9 August 2019 (s 2) Fisheries Legislation Amendment Act 2019 A2019-27 pt 4 notified LR 2 October 2019 s 1, s 2 commenced 2 October 2019 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 4 commenced 18 November 2019 (s 2 and CN2019-17) Animal Welfare Legislation Amendment Act 2019 A2019-35 pt 10 notified LR 10 October 2019 s 1, s 2 commenced 10 October 2019 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 10 commenced 10 April 2020 (s 2 (2)) Planning and Environment Legislation Amendment Act 2020 A2020-22 pt 7 notified LR 10 June 2022 s 1, s 2 commenced 10 June 2020 (LA s 75 (1)) pt 7 commenced 11 June 2020 (s 2).
Endnotes 3 Legislation history page 314 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Emergencies Amendment Act 2020 A2020-47 sch 1 pt 1.5 notified LR 3 September 2020 s 1, s 2 commenced 3 September 2020 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 1 pt 1.5 commenced 4 September 2020 (s 2) Statute Law Amendment Act 2021 A2021-12 sch 3 pt 3.39 notified LR 9 June 2021 s 1, s 2 commenced 9 June 2021 (LA s 75 (1)) sch 3 pt 3.39 commenced 23 June 2021 (s 2 (1)).
Endnotes Amendment history 4 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 315 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 4 Amendment history Commencement s 2 om LA s 89 (4) Objects of Act s 6 am A2016-2 s 8, s 9 Application of Act to Emergencies Act 2004 s 7 am A2016-33 amdt 1.37, amdt 1.38; A2020-47 amdts 1.12-1.14; pars renum R24 LA What is a species? s 15 am A2016-29 s 4; pars renum R7 LA What is a native species? s 16 am A2016-29 s 5 Conservator—functions s 21 am A2016-24 s 47, s 48 Draft nature conservation strategy—public consultation s 51 am A2017-3 s 6 What is a threatened native species? s 61 am A2016-29 s 56 Threatened native species list—categories s 63 sub A2016-29 s 6 Threatened native species list—eligibility for national categories s 64 sub A2016-29 s 6 Threatened native species list—eligibility for regional categories s 64A ins A2016-29 s 6 am A2018-42 amdt 3.81 Threatened native species list—eligibility criteria s 65 am A2016-29 s 56 Threatened native species list—criteria to review s 66 am A2016-29 s 56 Threatened ecological communities list—categories s 69 am A2016-29 s 7; pars renum R7 LA Threatened ecological communities list—eligibility for categories s 70 am A2016-29 s 8; ss renum R7 LA Threatened ecological communities list criteria—review s 72 am A2016-29 s 56.
Endnotes 4 Amendment history page 316 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Definitions—pt 4.3 s 72A ins A2016-2 s 10 om A2018-33 s 89 def listing advice ins A2016-2 s 10 om A2016-29 s 89 def listing assessment ins A2016-2 s 10 om A2018-33 s 89 def public consultation notice ins A2016-2 s 10 om A2018-33 s 89 What is a key threatening processes list? s 75 am A2016-2 s 11; A2018-33 s 90 Key threatening processes list s 76 orig s 76 om A2016-2 s 12 pres s 76 ins A2016-2 s 13 reloc and renum as s 76 A2018-33 s 91 Key threatening processes list s 79A reloc and renum as s 76 Public may nominate items for list s 79B ins A2016-2 s 13 om A2018-33 s 92 Scientific committee may reject nomination from public s 79C ins A2016-2 s 13 om A2018-33 s 92 Scientific committee may nominate items for list s 79D ins A2016-2 s 13 om A2018-33 s 92 Public consultation s 79E ins A2016-2 s 13 om A2018-33 s 92 Listing assessment s 79F ins A2016-2 s 13 om A2018-33 s 92 Listing advice s 79G ins A2016-2 s 13 om A2016-29 s 10 Minister to decide whether to include item in list s 79H ins A2016-2 s 13 am A2016-29 s 11, s 12 om A2018-33 s 92.
Endnotes Amendment history 4 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 317 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Definitions—pt 4.4 div 4.4.1 hdg ins A2016-29 s 13 Definitions—pt 4.4 s 80 ins A2016-2 s 14 def assessed at a national scale ins A2016-29 s 14 def common assessment method ins A2016-29 s 14 def listing advice ins A2016-2 s 14 om A2016-29 s 15 def listing assessment ins A2016-2 s 14 def nationally threatened ins A2016-29 s 16 def participating State ins A2016-29 s 16 def public consultation notice ins A2016-2 s 14 Including, transferring and omitting items in list—general div 4.4.2 hdg ins A2016-29 s 17 Nominations—public may nominate item at any time s 81 am A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Nominations—scientific committee may reject nomination s 82 am A2016-29 s 18 Nominations—public consultation s 84 am A2016-29 s 19 Nominations—scientific committee to carry out listing assessment s 85 am A2016-29 s 20; A2018-33 s 93 Scientific committee to prepare listing advice s 86 om A2016-29 s 21 Minister to decide whether to include, transfer or omit item s 87 am A2016-29 ss 22-24; A2018-33 s 94, s 95 Minister’s decision—include item s 88 am A2016-29 s 25, s 26; A2018-33 s 96 Minister’s decision—transfer item s 89 am A2016-29 s 27, s 28; A2018-33 s 96 Minister’s decision—omit item s 90 am A2016-29 s 29, s 30; A2018-33 s 96 Including or transferring certain nationally threatened items div 4.4.3 hdg ins A2016-29 s 31 Minister may include or transfer nationally threatened items without nomination s 90A ins A2016-29 s 31 am A2018-33 s 97.
Endnotes 4 Amendment history page 318 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Conservation advice div 4.4.4 hdg ins A2016-29 s 31 Conservation advice guidelines s 90B ins A2016-29 s 31 Conservation advice s 90C ins A2016-29 s 31 sub A2018-33 s 98 Conservation advice—scientific committee to prepare s 90D ins A2016-29 s 31 om A2018-33 s 98 Conservation advice—adopting advice for nationally threatened item s 90E ins A2016-29 s 31 am A2018-33 ss 99-101 Conservation advice—scientific committee to review s 90F ins A2016-29 s 31 am A2018-33 s 102 Final version of list and notification div 4.4.5 hdg ins A2016-29 s 31 Final version of list and notification s 91 am A2016-29 s 32, s 33 Scientific committee to prepare conservation advice s 92 om A2016-29 s 34 Minor amendments of list div 4.4.6 hdg ins A2016-29 s 35 What is a minor amendment?—div 4.4.6 s 93 sub A2016-29 s 35 Minister may make minor amendments s 94 am A2017-4 amdt 3.103; A2018-33 s 103 Minor amendment—including similar species s 95 am A2016-29 s 36; A2018-33 s 104 Minor amendment—omitting similar species s 96 am A2016-29 s 37; A2018-33 s 105 Definitions—Act s 98 def relevant species sub A2016-29 s 38 Minister to decide if action plan needed s 100A ins A2016-29 s 39 am A2017-3 s 7.
Endnotes Amendment history 4 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 319 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Draft action plan—conservator to prepare s 101 am A2016-29 s 40 Action plan—monitoring and review s 108 am A2016-29 s 42 Action plan—ending action plan after review s 108A ins A2016-29 s 43 Draft native species conservation plan—conservator to prepare s 117 am A2016-29 s 44, s 56 Draft native species conservation plan—consultation with lessee and custodian s 119 sub A2018-18 s 11 Offence—take native animal s 132 am A2018-32 amdt 3.53 Offence—keep non-exempt animal s 133 am A2018-32 amdt 3.53 Offence—take native plant—unleased land s 140 am A2020-22 s 16 Offence—take and sell native plant—unleased land s 141 am A2020-22 s 16 Chapter 6 exceptions s 153 am A2019-20 s 11; A2019-27 s 79 What is a controlled native species?—ch 7 s 157 am A2016-24 s 49 What is a draft controlled native species management plan?—ch 7 s 159 am A2016-2 s 15 Draft controlled native species management plan—consultation with lessee and custodian s 161 sub A2016-24 s 50 am A2018-18 s 12, s 13; ss renum R14 LA Cultural resource management plan ch 7A hdg ins A2019-27 s 80 Meaning of cultural resource management plan s 168A ins A2019-27 s 80 Preparation of draft cultural resource management plan s 168B ins A2019-27 s 80 Draft cultural resource management plan—revision and submission to Minister s 168C ins A2019-27 s 80.
Endnotes 4 Amendment history page 320 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Draft cultural resource management plan—Minister to approve, return or reject s 168D ins A2019-27 s 80 Draft cultural resource management plan—Minister’s direction to revise etc s 168E ins A2019-27 s 80 Cultural resource management plan—minor amendments s 168F ins A2019-27 s 80 Cultural resource management plan—conservator to implement s 168G ins A2019-27 s 80 Cultural resource management plan—reporting s 168H ins A2019-27 s 80 Cultural resource management plan—review s 168I ins A2019-27 s 80 Draft reserve management plan—planning reports and strategic environmental assessments s 178 om A2020-22 s 17 Ramsar wetland management plan—monitoring and review s 203 am A2017-20 s 15 Application—certain biological resources s 208 am A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Offence—take animal into reserve s 214 am A2019-35 s 138, s 139; ss renum R22 LA Offence—weapons and traps in reserve s 217 am A2020-22 s 18, s 19; ss renum R23 LA Offence—take plant or plant reproductive material into reserve s 219 am A2017-20 s 16 Chapter 9 exceptions s 252 am A2017-39 s 4; A2019-20 s 12; A2019-27 s 81 Conservator may make activities declarations s 256 am A2015-33 amdt 1.153 Conservator may close reserve s 259 am A2015-33 amdt 1.154; A2016-2 s 16; A2019-27 s 82 Offence—enter closed reserve s 260 am A2016-2 s 17 Part 10.2 exceptions s 261 am A2015-33 amdt 3.2; pars renum R2 LA; A2019-20 s 13; A2019-27 s 83.
Endnotes Amendment history 4 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 321 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Who is an influential person for a corporation?—ch 11 s 262A ins A2019-20 s 14 Licence—application s 264 am A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Licence—application to amend licence s 287 am A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Licence—application to transfer licence s 289 am A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Licence—application for renewal of licence s 291 am A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Licence—replacing when lost, stolen or destroyed s 293 am A2016-18 amdt 3.151, amdt 3.152 Licence—surrender s 294 am A2016-18 amdt 3.153, amdt 3.154; A2021-12 amdt 3.92 Minor public works in reserves ch 13A hdg ins A2017-39 s 5 Minor public works code s 318A ins A2017-39 s 5 Direction to leave reserve s 325 am A2020-22 s 20; ss renum R23 LA Conservator’s directions s 331 am A2016-29 s 45; A2018-18 s 14 Power to enter premises s 338 am A2019-27 s 84 Warrants—application made other than in person s 346 am A2018-33 amdt 1.49, amdt 1.50 Receipt for things seized s 350 am A2019-20 s 15 Approved forms s 369 om A2021-12 amdt 3.93 Repeals and consequential amendments ch 17 hdg om LA s 89 (3) Legislation repealed s 372 om LA s 89 (3) Legislation amended—sch 2 s 373 om LA s 89 (3).
Endnotes 4 Amendment history page 322 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Transitional ch 20 hdg exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Meaning of commencement day—ch 20 s 400 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Nature conservation strategy s 401 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Endangered species s 402 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Vulnerable species s 403 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Endangered ecological communities s 404 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Notification of lists s 404A ins as mod SL2015-26 s 5 exp 11 June 2017 (s 404A (3) and see SL2015-26 s 6) Threatening processes to be key threatening processes s 405 om A2016-2 s 18 Action plans s 406 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Protected fish, invertebrates, native plants and native animals to be protected species s 407 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Exempt animals s 408 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Plans of management for reserves to be reserve management plans s 409 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Draft plans of management for reserves—public consultation stage s 410 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Draft plans of management for reserves—submission to Minister stage s 411 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Licences s 412 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Management agreements s 413 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Transitional regulations s 414 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415) Expiry—ch 20 s 415 exp 11 June 2017 (s 415).
Endnotes Amendment history 4 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 323 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Transitional—Nature Conservation Amendment Act 2016 ch 21 hdg ins A2016-29 s 46 exp 17 June 2018 (s 424) Meaning of commencement day—ch 21 s 420 ins A2016-29 s 46 exp 17 June 2018 (s 424) Threatened native species list s 421 ins A2016-29 s 46 exp 17 June 2018 (s 424) Conservation advice not needed for species already on list s 422 ins A2016-29 s 46 exp 17 June 2018 (s 424) Transitional regulations s 423 ins A2016-29 s 46 exp 17 June 2018 (s 424) Expiry—ch 21 s 424 ins A2016-29 s 46 exp 17 June 2018 (s 424) Consequential amendments sch 2 om LA s 89 (3) Dictionary dict am A2015-33 amdt 1.155; A2016-29 s 47 def assessed at a national scale ins A2016-29 s 48 def coastal sea ins A2016-29 s 48 def common assessment method ins A2016-29 s 48 def conservation advice sub A2016-29 s 49 def conservation dependent species am A2016-29 s 56 def continental shelf ins A2016-29 s 50 def critically endangered ecological community am A2016-29 s 56 def critically endangered species am A2016-29 s 56 def cultural resource management plan ins A2019-27 s 85 def endangered ecological community am A2016-29 s 56 def endangered species am A2016-29 s 56 def exclusive economic zone ins A2016-29 s 50 def extinct in the wild species om A2016-29 s 51 def extinct species om A2016-29 s 51 def fisheries management plan ins A2019-27 s 85 def influential person ins A2019-20 s 16 def listing advice sub A2016-2 s 19 om A2016-29 s 51 def listing assessment sub A2016-2 s 19; A2018-33 s 106 def minor amendment sub A2016-29 s 52.
Endnotes 4 Amendment history page 324 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au def national category ins A2016-29 s 53 def nationally threatened ins A2016-29 s 53 def participating State ins A2016-29 s 53 def provisionally listed threatened ecological community om A2016-29 s 54 def provisionally listed threatened species om A2016-29 s 54 def public consultation notice sub A2016-2 s 19; A2018-33 s 107 def regional category ins A2016-29 s 55 def regionally conservation dependent species ins A2016-29 s 55 def regionally threatened species ins A2016-29 s 55 def seabed ins A2016-29 s 55 def vulnerable ecological community am A2016-29 s 56 def vulnerable species am A2016-29 s 56.
Endnotes Earlier republications 5 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 325 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 5 Earlier republications Some earlier republications were not numbered. The number in column 1 refers to the publication order. Since 12 September 2001 every authorised republication has been published in electronic pdf format on the ACT legislation register. A selection of authorised republications have also been published in printed format. These republications are marked with an asterisk (*) in column 1. Electronic and printed versions of an authorised republication are identical. Republication No and date Effective Last amendment made by Republication for R1 11 June 2015 11 June 2015– 9 July 2015 not amended new Act R2 10 July 2015 10 July 2015– 13 Oct 2015 not amended modifications by SL2015-26 R3 14 Oct 2015 14 Oct 2015– 23 Feb 2016 A2015-33 amendments by A2015-33 R4 24 Feb 2016 24 Feb 2016– 26 Apr 2016 A2016-2 amendments by A2016-2 R5 27 Apr 2016 27 Apr 2016– 11 May 2016 A2016-18 amendments by A2016-18 R6 12 May 2016 12 May 2016– 16 June 2016 A2016-24 amendments by A2016-24 R7 17 June 2016 17 June 2016– 20 June 2016 A2016-29 amendments by A2016-29 R8 21 June 2016 21 June 2016– 22 Feb 2017 A2016-33 amendments by A2016-33 R9 23 Feb 2017 23 Feb 2017– 8 Mar 2017 A2017-3 amendments by A2017-3 R10 9 Mar 2017 9 Mar 2017– 11 June 2017 A2017-4 amendments by A2017-4 R11 12 June 2017 12 June 2017– 15 June 2017 A2017-4 expiry of modifications and transitional provisions (ch 20).
Endnotes 5 Earlier republications page 326 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 R25 23/06/21 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au Republication No and date Effective Last amendment made by Republication for R12 16 June 2017 16 June 2017– 13 Nov 2017 A2017-20 amendments by A2017-20 R13 14 Nov 2017 14 Nov 2017– 16 May 2018 A2017-39 amendments by A2017-39 R14 17 May 2018 17 May 2018– 17 June 2018 A2018-18 amendments by A2018-18 R15 18 June 2018 18 June 2018– 1 Oct 2018 A2018-18 expiry of transitional provisions (ch 21) R16 2 Oct 2018 2 Oct 2018– 22 Oct 2018 A2018-33 amendments by A2018-33 R17 23 Oct 2018 23 Oct 2018– 21 Nov 2018 A2018-33 amendments by A2018-33 R18 22 Nov 2018 22 Nov 2018– 20 Dec 2018 A2018-42 amendments by A2018-42 R19 21 Dec 2018 21 Dec 2018– 8 Aug 2019 A2018-42 amendments by A2018-32 R20 9 Aug 2019 9 Aug 2019– 17 Nov 2019 A2019-20 amendments by A2019-20 R21 18 Nov 2019 18 Nov 2019– 9 Apr 2020 A2019-27 amendments by A2019-27 R22 10 Apr 2020 10 Apr 2020– 10 June 2020 A2019-35 amendments by A2019-35 R23 11 June 2020 11 June 2020– 3 Sept 2020 A2020-22 amendments by A2020-22 R24 4 Sept 2020 4 Sept 2020– 22 June 2021 A2020-47 amendments by A2020-47.
Endnotes Expired transitional or validating provisions 6 R25 23/06/21 Nature Conservation Act 2014 Effective: 23/06/21 page 327 Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel—also accessible at www.legislation.act.gov.au 6 Expired transitional or validating provisions This Act may be affected by transitional or validating provisions that have expired. The expiry does not affect any continuing operation of the provisions (see Legislation Act 2001, s 88 (1)). Expired provisions are removed from the republished law when the expiry takes effect and are listed in the amendment history using the abbreviation ‘exp’ followed by the date of the expiry. To find the expired provisions see the version of this Act before the expiry took effect. The ACT legislation register has point-in-time versions of this Act. © Australian Capital Territory 2021.
.
ACT Government logo and ACT Parks and Conservation Logo RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021 CANBERRA NATURE PARK.
Accessibility The ACT Government is committed to making its information, services, events and venues as accessible as possible. If you have difficulty reading a standard printed document and would like to receive this publication in an alternative format, such as large print, please phone Access Canberra on 13 22 81 or email the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate at EPSDDComms@act.gov.au. If English is not your first language and you require a translating and interpreting service, please phone 13 14 50. If you are deaf, or have a speech or hearing impairment, and need the teletypewriter service, please phone 13 36 77 and ask for Access Canberra on 13 22 81. For speak and listen users, please phone 1300 555 727 and ask for Access Canberra on 13 22 81. For more information on these services visit www.relayservice.com.au. Published by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. © Australian Capital Territory 2021 ISBN 978-1-921117-91-6 This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, no part may be reproduced without the written permission of the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, PO Box 158, Canberra ACT 2601. Disclaimer: Any representation, statement, opinion, advice, information or data expressed or implied in this publication is made in good faith but on the basis that the ACT Government, its agents and employees are not liable (whether by reason of negligence, lack of care or otherwise) to any person for any damage or loss whatsoever which has occurred or may occur in relation to that person taking or not taking (as the case may be) action in respect of any representation, statement, advice, information or data referred to the above. Maps: Maps use ACT Government Spatial Data from ACTMapi © Australian Capital Territory 2021. Please see www.ACTMapi.act.gov.au. While all care is taken to ensure accuracy, the ACT Government does not warrant that the maps are free from errors. Maps are drawn in Map Grid of Australia Zone 55H (Geodetic Datum Australia 1994). Printed: 100% recycled paper.
Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021.
Traditional Custodian Acknowledgement We acknowledge the Ngunnawal people as Canberra’s first inhabitants and Traditional Custodians. We recognise the special relationship and connection that Ngunnawal people have with this Country. Prior to the displacement of Ngunnawal people from their land, they were a thriving people whose life and culture was connected unequivocally to this land in a way that only they understand and know and is core to their physical and spiritual being. The segregation of the Ngunnawal people from Culture and Country has had long-lasting, profound, and ongoing health and well-being effects on their life, cultural practices, families, and continuation of their law/lore. We acknowledge the historic interruption of the Ngunnawal people of Canberra and their surrounding regions. We recognise the significant contribution the Ngunnawal people have played in caring for Country. For time immemorial they have maintained a tangible and intangible cultural, social, environmental, spiritual, and economic connection to these lands and waters. Ngunnawal Language Acknowledgement Yuma Dhawura nguna ngurumbangu gunanggu Ngunnawal. Nginggada dindi dhawura Ngunnawalbun yindjumaralidjinyin. Mura bidji mulanggaridjindjula. Naraganawaliyiri yarabindjula. This country is Ngunnawal (ancestral/spiritual) homeland. We all always respect elders, male and female, as well as Ngunnawal country itself. They always keep the pathways of their ancestors alive. They walk together as one. Acknowledgement of contributors The ACT Government is grateful to the organisations and individuals who contributed to the preparation of this reserve management plan for Canberra Nature Park. These include Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians, ParkCare groups, recreation user groups, conservation groups, other non-government organisations, individual community members and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate staff. This reserve management plan has been developed by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. The draft plan was open for public comment from 23 September to 16 December 2019. All submissions made during the public comment period have been taken into consideration in preparing this plan. Photographs Front cover Juvenile Rosenberg’s Goanna (Varanus rosenberg) (Matthew Higgins), Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve (Mark Jekabsons), Sticky Everlasting (Xerochrysum viscosum) (Mark Jekabsons). Echidna artwork by Brendon Little. Back Cover: Aboriginal grinding grooves, Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve (PCS Library), Large dam at Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve (Mark Jekabsons), ParkCare volunteers mapping a rabbit warren at Mount Ainslie Nature Reserve (PCS Library). Flora collage – page iv: Fringed Lily (Thysanotus tuberosus), Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorhynchoides) (Emma Cook), Creamy Candles (Stackhousia monogyna), Wooly Pointed Everlasting (Coronidium oxylepsis subsp. lanatum), Milkmaids (Burchardia umbellata), Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta), Early Nancy (female) (Wurmbea dioica), Native Bluebell (Wahlenbergia sp.) (Lesley Peden), Sticky Everlasting (Xerochrysum viscosum) (Emma Cook), Late Leopard Orchid (Diuris semilunulata) or Leopard Doubletail (Diuris pardina), Rosemary Grevillea (Grevillea rosmarinifolia subsp. rosmarinifolia), Creamy Candles (Stackhousia monogyna), Austral Indigo (Indigofera australis), Wax Lip Orchid (Glossodia major), Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) (Lois Padgham). Note: The Rosemary Grevillea (Grevillia rosmarinifolia) is a heritage listed planting on Red Hill Nature Reserve.
 Fauna collage – page v: Boobook Owls (Ninox novaeseelandiae) (Andrew Tatnell), Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata), Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta) (Geoffrey Dabb), Echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus), Eastern Brown Snake (Pseudonaja textilis), Gang-gang Cockatoo (Callocephalon fimbriatum), Eastern Grey Kangaroo (Macropus giganteus) (Mark Jekabsons), Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana), Cunningham’s Skink (Egernia cunninghami), Crimson Rosella (Platycercus elegans), Eastern Bettong (Bettongia gaimardi), Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella), Brush-tailed Possum (Trichosurus vulpecula), Eastern Banjo Frog or Pobblebonk (Limnodynastes dumerilii), Shingleback Lizard (Tiliqua rugosa). Mixed collage – page xii: Interpretive signage, stone steps, nesting box, dog walker, Mulligans Flat woolshed (Mark Jekabsons), bike rider (Andrew Tatnell) fire fuel reduction (Lois Padgham). Except where otherwise acknowledged, images are from the ACT Parks and Conservation Service Library. vi | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Contents Traditional Custodian Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi Acknowledgement of contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi Ministerial foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Part 1. Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 5 1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 1.1 Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 1.2 Future nature reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 1.3 Statement of significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 1.4 Management goals and key outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 1.5 Purpose and structure of the reserve management plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 1.6 Management framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 1.7 Implementation of the management plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 1.8 Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 1.9 Land planning in the ACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 1.10 Management responsibilities in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 1.11 Review of management responsibilities and boundary adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 1.12 Introduction: management actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 2. Plants and animals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 2.1 Ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 2.2 Threatened plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 2.3 Native animals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 2.4 Habitat connectivity and wildlife movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 2.5 Management considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 2.6 Plants and animals: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 3. Land and water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 3.1 Landscapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 3.2 Geology, soils and land surface condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 3.3 Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 3.4 Management considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 3.5 Land and water: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69 Environment.act.gov.au | vii.
4. Aboriginal connection to Country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 4.1 Aboriginal heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 4.2 Contemporary Aboriginal connection to Country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 4.3 The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 4.4 Murumbung Yurung Murra Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 4.5 ACT Aboriginal Fire Management Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 4.6 Cultural water flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 4.7 Management considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 4.8 Aboriginal connection to Country: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76 5. Historic (non-Aboriginal) heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 5.1 From first European settlement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 5.2 Post federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 5.3 Management considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 5.4 Historic heritage: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 6. Zoning and access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 6.1 Reserve management zones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 6.2 Policies for the location of infrastructure in defined management zones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88 6.3 Access restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90 7. Nature-based experiences (recreation, health and tourism) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 7.1 Welcoming visitors and managing impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 7.2 Tourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94 7.3 Reserve facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 7.4 Nature-based activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 7.5 Booked group events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 7.6 Commercial activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 7.7 New recreational activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 7.8 Monitoring recreational use and visitor satisfaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 7.9 Visitor safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 7.10 Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment nature reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 7.11 Prohibited activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 7.12 Nature-based experiences: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 8. Community involvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 8.1 Nature’s classroom—providing educational experiences in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 8.2 Community involvement in management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 8.3 Neighbours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119 8.4 Opportunities for further community involvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119 8.5 Community involvement: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120 9. Research and monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 9.1 Natural values research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 9.2 Cultural heritage research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126 9.3 Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127 9.4 Research and monitoring: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129 viii | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
10. Planning, approvals and compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 10.1 Environmental assessment and approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 10.2 Management operations and environmental protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132 10.3 Firearms and other weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133 10.4 Domestic animals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133 10.5 Resource extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 10.6 Contaminated sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 10.7 Suburban residents and neighbours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 10.8 Rural leases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136 10.9 Compliance and enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136 10.10 Planning, approvals and compliance: management policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . 137 Part 2. Canberra Nature Park Reserve Complexes and Summary Profiles 139 Reserve complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140 Northern Woodlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142 Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144 Justice Robert Hope Park Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146 Kinlyside Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148 Mount Ainslie Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150 Mount Majura Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 Mount Pleasant Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 154 Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156 Nadjung Mada Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158 Central Grasslands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160 Budjan Galindji Grasslands Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162 Crace Grasslands Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164 Dunlop Grasslands Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166 Gungaderra Grasslands Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168 Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands Nature Reserve (part closed reserve) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170 Mulanggari Grasslands Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172 Sandstone Reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174 Aranda Bushland Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176 Black Mountain Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178 Bruce Ridge Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180 Gossan Hill Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182 O’Connor Ridge Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184 Percival Hill Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186 Environment.act.gov.au | ix.
Appendices Appendix 1: Table of goals, key outcomes, policies, objectives and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235 Appendix 2: Legislative and policy framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250 Appendix 3: IUCN Category IV management objectives and Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252 Appendix 4: Geological features of Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260 Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266 Connections with rivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188 Cooleman Ridge Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190 McQuoids Hill Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192 Mount Painter Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194 Oakey Hill Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196 The Pinnacle Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198 Urambi Hills Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200 Kowen Escarpment and Molonglo Gorge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202 Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204 Molonglo Gorge Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206 Woden Woodlands and Grasslands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208 Callum Brae Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210 Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212 Isaacs Ridge Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214 Jerrabomberra West Grasslands Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216 Mount Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218 Mount Taylor Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220 Red Hill Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222 Wanniassa Hills Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224 Southern Hills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226 Melrose Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228 Rob Roy Nature Reserve (part closed reserve) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230 Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232 x | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Figures Figure 1.1 Map of Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Figure 1.2 Key elements that guide management of Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 FigURE 1.3 The Adaptive Management Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Figure 2.1 Vegetation of Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 Figure 2.2 Landscape connectivity across Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 Figure 2.4 Conceptual relationships between grass structure and some fauna species in grasslands and open woodland in south-eastern Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 Figure 3.1 Soil Landscapes of Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 Figure 6.1 Canberra Nature Park Zoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 Tables Table 1.1 Canberra Nature Park Nature Reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Table 2.1 Reservation of woodland communities in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 Table 2.2 Reservation of Natural Temperate Grassland in the ACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Table 2.3 Threatened plant species and ecological communities found in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . 34 Table 2.4 Natural heritage sites in Canberra Nature Park listed on the ACT Heritage Register . . . . . . . . . . . 34 Table 2.5 Threatened grassland fauna species found in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 Table 2.6 Threatened woodland birds found in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 Table 3.1 Geological sites listed on the ACT Heritage Register . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 Table 4.1 Aboriginal places (not including artefact scatters or scarred trees) within Canberra Nature Park listed on the ACT Heritage Register . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 Table 5.1 Historic heritage places listed on the ACT Heritage Register . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81 Table 6.1 Management zones in Canberra Nature Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86 Table 6.2 Policies for the construction and location of infrastructure in defined management zones . . . . . . 88 Table 7.1 Reserves where dogs, horses and cycling are permitted/prohibited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 Boxes Box 1 Walking—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 Box 2 Orienteering and rogaining—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99 Box 3 Dog walking—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100 Box 4 Horse riding—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102 Box 5 Cycling and mountain biking—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103 Box 6 Geocaching—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 Box 7 Bouldering—best practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 Environment.act.gov.au | xi.
Ministerial foreword Canberra Nature Park is located on the traditional lands of the Ngunnawal people and the ACT Government acknowledges the ongoing, deep connection Traditional Custodians have to their Country. Today, Canberra Nature Park is integral to our city’s image, lifestyle and liveability. The value of Canberra Nature Park to the growing and increasingly urban city of Canberra is immense. In partnership with our community, the government has a key role in protecting, preserving and enhancing our natural environment and cultural heritage places, while also considering the needs of a growing city. We understand that Canberra Nature Park is a precious resource that is valued for its intrinsic qualities as well as the many social, environmental and economic benefits it provides. Canberra Nature Park connects communities, reflects our culture, provides a classroom for life-long learning, provides resilience against a changing climate, gives us clean air and water, contributes to our economy and is part of an evolving tourism industry. Canberra Nature Park’s reserves protect forested rocky hills and ridge lines, grassy woodlands on the lower and middle slopes, lowland native grasslands and many places of cultural significance to Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. These precious areas are what give our city its distinctive character as the nation’s “city in the landscape”. Canberra Nature Park also provides an extraordinary opportunity for nature-based experiences and an active lifestyle that so many Canberrans value. Many of Canberra Nature Park’s nature reserves were created in the 1970s and early 1980s and set aside under the National Capital Plan to protect their scenic landscape qualities. Since the late 1980s, however, additional reserves have been established to protect threatened species and ecological communities. Effective planning and management for Canberra Nature Park aims to maintain and restore ecologically sustainable and resilient landscapes in the face of climate change, to conserve natural and cultural heritage values, and to support Aboriginal connection to Country. This reserve management plan has been prepared under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 and sets out how the ACT Parks and Conservation Service will protect the natural and cultural values of Canberra Nature Park into the future, while also welcoming visitors and enriching the life of the Canberra community. The ACT Government recognises the significant role that volunteers play in helping to meet these objectives. Much consultation has been undertaken in preparing this plan, and the contributions of individuals and organisations are greatly appreciated. The plan consolidates the outcomes of this consultation. I encourage you to enjoy Canberra Nature Park, to understand more about its natural and cultural values, and to use it to support your physical and emotional well-being. Mick Gentleman MLA Minister for Planning and Land Management Environment.act.gov.au | 1.
MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS).
Vision Canberra Nature Park’s natural and cultural heritage is conserved forever in partnership with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians, enriching the lives of a vibrant and healthy community..
Part 1 CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
GRASSY WOODLAND AT MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) CHAPTER 1 CANBERRA NATURE PARK: » includes 39 nature reserves » > 11,400 hectares » protects critically endangered ecological communities and threatened species » is accessible – almost 50% of Canberrans live within 500 metres » contributes to the “bush capital” character » offers extensive opportunities to experience nature and enjoy low key recreational activities. THE RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN: » sets a long term vision » describes important values » establishes goals and objectives » provides actions for implementation over 10 years..
1. Introduction 1.1 Canberra Nature Park Canberra Nature Park reserves are located on the lands of the Ngunnawal people, whose ancestors managed this landscape for more than 25,000 years prior to European colonisation and the establishment of the ACT. Canberra Nature Park protects places and objects of Aboriginal and historic heritage significance. The ACT Parks and Conservation Service respects and acknowledges Ngunnawal connection with Country – past and present – and is committed to facilitating greater partnerships with Traditional Custodians, the Ngunnawal people, to manage Country together for the benefit of future generations. Canberra Nature Park comprises 39 nature reserves protecting remnant natural vegetation in and around urban Canberra. Many of the reserves include Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland or Natural Temperate Grassland; both ecosystems are critically endangered in the ACT and nationally. A number of threatened or declining animal species that rely on these ecosystems are also found in Canberra Nature Park. The reserves are valuable wildlife corridors, supporting the movement of some species through urban Canberra and into surrounding bushland within the broader region. Protected areas like Canberra Nature Park are increasingly recognised as critical links to building and improving ecological connectivity across the wider landscape, and strengthening resilience against disturbance or threats, such as climate change. The landscape values of the inner hills and ridges that make up Canberra Nature Park were recognised in Walter Burley Griffin’s 1912 winning design for the layout of the National Capital. More than half of Canberra Nature Park reserves are identified in the National Capital Plan as Designated Areas—“having the special characteristics of the National Capital”—and remain key components in the broader landscape that forms a backdrop to the National Capital. Renowned as the ‘city in the landscape’, Canberra is unique in providing over 400,000 Canberrans with easy access to nature. With over 25% of Canberra’s population living within 100 metres, and almost 50% living within 500 metres of a reserve, Canberra Nature Park makes a significant contribution to the ACT’s landscape character and is highly valued for nature-based recreation, including walking, running, dog walking, cycling, mountain biking, horse riding, and group activities such as orienteering and rogaining. With Canberra’s urban densification and an increasing population, Canberra Nature Park provides the living infrastructure needed to sustain life and maintain Canberra’s liveability and wellbeing – setting us apart from many other cities in the world. The benefits include climate resilience, purification and detoxification of water, air and soil, nature-based experiences (health, education, tourism and recreation), aesthetic values, spiritual and cultural experiences, mental and physical health and well-being, and economic values. Canberra Nature Park is an integral natural feature of Canberra, attracting families to live and work in the ACT and attracting businesses that recognise the benefits of workers being able to access nature. Canberra Nature Park became a wellbeing hub for the people of Canberra during the COVID 19 lockdowns in 2020 and 2021, with the highest ever recorded level of visitation as people used the park for recreation, as respite and a place just to get outside. Social connection Access and connectivity Safety Education and life-long learning Environment and climate Housing and home Economy Identity and belonging Living standards Time Governance and institutions Personal Wellbeing Health ACT Wellbeing Framework Environment.act.gov.au | 7.
Canberra Nature Park contributes to all 12 domains – or areas affecting our quality of life as described in the ACT Wellbeing Framework (ACT Government 2020): https://www.act.gov.au/wellbeing/home Canberra Nature Park reserves are identified as public land nature reserves in the Territory Plan. The reserves currently cover approximately 11,400 hectares in and around urban Canberra (Figure 1.1, Table 1.1). A small area of public land special purpose reserve at Isaacs Ridge is also included. Table 1.1 lists when each of the 39 nature reserves was protected, indicating the long history of Canberra Nature Park, and also identifies which reserves are within Designated Areas. Several adjacent areas, and other small areas of unleased land, are also managed by the Parks and Conservation Service for environmental outcomes and some may be added to Canberra Nature Park in the future. Many Canberra Nature Park nature reserves were protected in 1993 following the introduction of ACT self- government. Before 1993, ACT agricultural or parks agencies actively managed a number of the areas. Several of the reserves have been extended since they were first established through the addition of environmental offset areas. The Planning and Development Act and the Nature Conservation Act require that reserve management plans are prepared for public land reserves in the ACT. There are currently seven Reserve Management Plans in place in the ACT for: Molonglo River Reserve (2019); Lower Cotter Catchment (2018); Tidbinbilla (2012); Namadgi National Park (2010); Jerrabomberra Wetlands (2010); Murrumbidgee River Corridor (1998); and Canberra Nature Park (1999). These plans are available at: https://www.environment.act.gov.au/nature-conservation/reserve- management-plans. CENTENARY TRAIL – MULLIGANS FLAT TO HALL (PCS LIBRARY) 8 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
1.2 Future nature reserves Over the life of this plan it is likely that other areas will be added to Canberra Nature Park and managed in accordance with this plan. The incorporation of any new area of land into the reserve system is achieved by the addition of a public land nature reserve overlay through a variation to the Territory Plan. Some areas may be added as a result of being set aside for conservation as environmental offsets under the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (the EPBC Act). Offsets are established to ameliorate the impact of development on matters of national environmental significance, such as Commonwealth-listed threatened species. Some planned offset sites are managed for conservation by the ACT Parks and Conservation Service and will be incorporated into Canberra Nature Park as nature reserves through future variations to the Territory Plan. Those reserves that are existing environmental offsets, or include offset areas, are identified in Table 1.1 and in individual reserve profiles in Part 2. Offset sites also have their own offset management plans, required under the provisions of the EPBC Act. Offset management plans are available on the ACT Offsets Register at: https://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools-resources/plans-registers/registers/offsets-register The ACT Planning Strategy (2018) that guides how Canberra will grow and change into the future has a number of strategic directions and actions to deliver on its vision—to be a sustainable, competitive and equitable city that respects Canberra as a city in the landscape and the national capital, while being responsive to the future and resilient to change. The Strategy articulates a range of actions to support the ACT Government to deliver this vision, including the following projects that are considering the environment—creation of new nature reserves, habitat and connectivity, and identifying offsets in the planning process for future development areas: » Western Edge investigation area » Eastern Broadacre area. As these projects progress, relevant statutory Commonwealth and ACT environmental and planning processes will be undertaken and new reserves established, as required. OPEN FOREST AT MOUNT MAJURA NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) Environment.act.gov.au | 9.
FIGURE 1.1 Map of Canberra Nature Park 10 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
TABLE 1.1 Canberra Nature Park Nature Reserves Nature Reserve Area (approx. ha) Year Protected IUCN Category Designated Area Offset Area Aranda Bushland 104 1993 IV Black Mountain 434 1970 IV Bruce Ridge 98 1993 IV Budjan Galindji Grasslands 20 2020 IV Callum Brae 143 2008 IV Cooleman Ridge 187 1993 IV Crace Grasslands 159 1995 IV Dunlop Grasslands 103 1997 IV Farrer Ridge 185 1993 IV Goorooyarroo 829 2004 IV Part Part Gossan Hill 47 1993 IV Gungaderra Grasslands (includes Gungahlin Hill) 297 1995 IV Part Isaacs Ridge 387 1993 IV Part Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands* 145 2016 IV Jerrabomberra West Grasslands* 261 2007 IV Justice Robert Hope Park 19 2016 IV Kinlyside 228 2014 IV Kowen Escarpment 466 1993 IV Melrose* 193 1993 IV McQuoids Hill 56 1993 IV Molonglo Gorge 506 1972 IV Mount Ainslie 637 1993 IV Mount Majura 502 1993 IV Mount Mugga Mugga 148 1993 IV Mount Painter 93 1993 IV Mount Pleasant 57 1993 IV Mount Taylor 300 1993 IV Mulanggari Grasslands 140 1995 IV Part Mulligans Flat 984 1995 IV Part Nadjung Mada 160 2021 IV Oakey Hill 65 1993 IV O’Connor Ridge 57 1993 IV Percival Hill 81 2006 IV Red Hill 293 1993 IV Rob Roy 2017 1993 IV The Pinnacle 154 1993 IV Part Tuggeranong Hill 365 1993 IV Urambi Hills 246 1993 IV Wanniassa Hills 262 1993 IV * Temporary name – a Ngunnawal language name, identified through consultation with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians, will be considered for new reserves and dual naming could be considered for some existing reserves. Note: For further information on International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) categories refer to Appendix 3. Environment.act.gov.au | 11.
1.3 Statement of significance Value Significance Natural values Canberra Nature Park protects remnants of woodlands and grasslands that were once widespread across south-eastern Australia. It includes the largest remaining patches of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in Australia. Canberra Nature Park’s reserves also protect critically endangered Natural Temperate Grasslands, important areas of dry forest and other vegetation types, and significant geological features and provide habitat for the largest populations nationally of several threatened grassland plant and animal species. Landscape The structure and geometry of Walter and Marion Mahony Griffin’s design for Canberra is inspired by the natural terrain. Hills and ridges, now largely contained within Canberra Nature Park, have been left undeveloped to frame suburbs located in the valleys and form the skyline at the end of key avenues. This landscape setting provides Canberra with a strong identity, and the city is considered to be an outstanding example of 20th century landscape design. Aboriginal connection to Country Canberra Nature Park has a rich Aboriginal history and includes many Ngunnawal heritage places of cultural and archaeological significance, such as stone artefact scatters and scarred trees, that are protected in consultation with Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations. The Traditional Custodians of the ACT, the Ngunnawal people, and other neighbouring language groups continue to have a strong cultural and spiritual relationship with the landscape. Historic heritage Pastoral settlement dates back to the 1820s. A small number of historic heritage sites remain in some reserves from 19th and early 20th century use. Preparation to establish the National Capital in the early 1900s included revegetating some inner hills and ridges that are now part of Canberra Nature Park. Protection of Canberra Nature Park reserves has a long history, with Black Mountain, Kowen Escarpment and Molonglo Gorge nature reserves protected in the early 1970s. Enriching the Canberra community Canberra Nature Park’s extensive natural bushland shapes the urban environment of Canberra and enriches the lives of the people living in our city. Nature-based experiences Many Canberra Nature Park reserves provide for a range of nature-based experiences and have high levels of use for walking and running, cycling and mountain biking, dog walking, horse riding, bird watching, orienteering and rogaining. These recreational and tourism opportunities contribute significantly to the health and well-being of the community. Community engagement The integration of Canberra Nature Park reserves with the city and suburbs of Canberra provides opportunities to better inform, educate and engage the community in nature conservation and heritage protection. ParkCare groups, active for over 30 years, have done much to improve the condition of reserves and to promote reserve values. Research There is a long history of ecological and taxonomic research within Canberra Nature Park, which contains the type localities of many species. Ongoing research into woodland ecology and restoration, currently focused in the predator-free Woodland Sanctuary in Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo reserves, is of international significance and contributes to adaptive management practices for species and ecosystems. Citizen science makes a significant contribution to research across Canberra Nature Park. These values are discussed in detail in subsequent chapters of this plan. 12 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
1.4 Management goals and key outcomes The long-term goals to protect Canberra Nature Park’s values reflect the statutory objectives for the management of nature reserves, with the second objective subject to the first: 1. conserve the natural environment; and 2. provide for public use for recreation, education and research. The long-term goals are underpinned by key outcomes. Goals Key outcomes Ecosystems and species are managed, in the face of a changing climate, for long-term viability and are well connected across the landscape. » Structure, function, composition and extent of ecosystems are maintained and/or improved. » Native species diversity and high value habitats are maintained and enhanced in priority areas. » Landscape connections between ecosystems are enhanced. » Threats, such as weeds, pest animals and inappropriate fire are managed. Canberra Nature Park protects and contributes to the special character of Canberra as Australia’s ‘city in the landscape’. » The landscape features of Canberra Nature Park are protected to maintain the visual backdrop and landscape setting of the National Capital. Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians’ aspirations to care for Country are respected and enabled and their connection to Country is enhanced, with traditional practices enriching contemporary management and cultural, social and economic benefits accruing to Traditional Custodians and society. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations are involved in reserve management. » Access to Country for cultural purposes is encouraged and supported. » Aboriginal heritage sites are protected. Historic heritage values are protected, interpreted and well maintained. » Historic heritage sites are conserved and interpreted to enhance understanding. Canberra Nature Park makes a significant contribution to the liveability of the city and the health and wellbeing of the community. » Nature-based experiences, including recreation and tourism, are enhanced through the provision of contemporary facilities, programs and information. » Accessibility is increased through the use of innovative technology and enabling facilities. » Canberra Nature Park provides a key venue for activities and experiences that improve community physical, emotional and social well-being. Environment.act.gov.au | 13.
Goals Key outcomes Life-long connections between people, nature and parks are created through learning opportunities inspired by nature. » Visitor experience is enriched by a range of opportunities and activities that promote appreciation, understanding and care of the natural and cultural values. » Community stewardship of reserves through volunteer activities contributes to social cohesion, environmental knowledge and shared management. » The knowledge and wisdom of Canberra’s community is harnessed to inform reserve management. » Novel and diverse partnerships with private, corporate, non government organisations (NGO) and government sectors enhance reserve management. » Local schools use Canberra Nature Park for nature based learning. » Online information about the natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park is readily accessible. Scientific evidence underpins management decisions. » Programs are implemented that provide an evidence-based framework for increased management effectiveness. » Universities and other research organisations are involved in long term social and ecological research programs. MOUNT TAYLOR NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY) 14 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
1.5 Purpose and structure of the reserve management plan 1.5.1 Purpose The purpose of this management plan is to: » describe the significance of Canberra Nature Park’s values » outline the legislative and policy context for management » set the vision, goals and objectives for management, and identify policies and actions to achieve the objectives » provide a basis for the community to understand and engage in reserve management. This plan provides direction and guidance to the land manager (the ACT Parks and Conservation Service), volunteers, visitors, proponents of activities and uses, Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians, neighbours and others with an interest in the area. The plan is a legal document, replacing the Canberra Nature Park Management Plan 1999. 1.5.2 Structure Part 1 of this plan describes the values of Canberra Nature Park, discusses management considerations, and sets out the overall goals, policies, objectives and actions for management. These terms are used in the following way: Goals and key outcomes: Statements that set the broad directions and desired outcomes for management in the long term. Objectives: Statements of desired outcomes over the life of this plan that are more specific than goals. Policies: Underlying positions on issues that provide the basis for a consistent management response. Actions: Specific undertakings, consistent with the policies, carried out to achieve the objectives over the life of this plan. Part 2 of this plan groups reserves into landscape complexes that have similar values and management approaches. Individual reserve profiles provide summary information for each reserve including: » key values » overview of management direction and priorities » maps showing natural values (Chapter 2 and Part 2) and reserve management zones (Chapter 6). Environment.act.gov.au | 15.
1.6 Management framework The management of Canberra Nature Park is underpinned or influenced by a wide range of legislation, planning and policy documents and strategies. Management of the values of Canberra Nature Park is guided by this plan, and will be supported by reserve implementation plans that will provide detail on how the objectives and actions identified in this plan will be achieved through on-ground activities. The relationships between these key elements is shown in Figure 1.2. FIGURE 1.2 Key elements that guide management of Canberra Nature Park 16 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
1.7 Implementation of the management plan The specific goals, objectives, policies and actions defined in this plan for managing the values of Canberra Nature Park (and the threats to those values) are to be implemented during the next ten years. These are consolidated in the table at Appendix 1, with priorities assigned. The table will form the basis of implementation plans to deliver this reserve management plan. Actions included in the reserve summary profiles will be incorporated into the implementation and operations plans. A report on implementation will be provided to the Minister five years after the plan is approved. The Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment conducted an investigation into the management of Canberra Nature Park in 2011. The Commissioner recommended that a monitoring strategy be developed to ensure that threats to reserves were quickly identified and that information was made readily available to ensure better decision making in reserve management. In response, the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program (CEMP) was developed to provide a framework for monitoring ecosystem condition and evaluating the effectiveness of management actions in achieving nature conservation objectives. CEMP includes indicators and metrics to enable evaluation and reporting of ecosystem condition through ecosystem monitoring plans. Application of the CEMP framework across the ACT reserve system will ultimately provide evidence to support land management decisions and is an integral part of an adaptive management approach to improve management effectiveness, as indicated in Figure 1.3. 1.7.1 Strategies, action plans and policies A range of strategies, action plans and policies inform management of Canberra Nature Park (see Appendix 3) and relevant information will be incorporated into implementation plans. FIGURE 1.3 The Adaptive Management Cycle Environment.act.gov.au | 17.
1.8 Legislation Key legislation for Canberra Nature Park is listed below. Other legislation and policy documents are listed at Appendix 2. ACT Planning and Development Act 2007 The Planning and Development Act governs land use in the ACT and establishes the Territory Plan. It provides for the identification of public land and its reservation for defined purposes, and outlines requirements for environmental impact assessment. Schedule 3 of the Act defines management objectives for all areas of public land. Nature Reserve management objectives are: 1. to conserve the natural environment 2. to provide for public use of the area for recreation, education and research. If there is an inconsistency between the application of these objectives then the second objective is subject to the first objective. Special Purpose Reserve management objective is: 1. to provide for public and community use of the area for recreation and education. The Act requires the preparation of public land management plans. If the land is wilderness area, national park, nature reserve, catchment area or a special purpose reserve managed under the Nature Conservation Act 2014, then the management plan is prepared under the Nature Conservation Act. Nature Conservation Act 2014 The Nature Conservation Act prescribes processes for management planning for the conservation reserves. Section 169 defines a reserve. It is the chief legislation for the management of reserves and the protection of native plants and animals in the ACT. Emergencies Act 2004 The Emergencies Act aims to protect and preserve life, property and the environment. The Act requires the preparation of a Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT and establishes the ACT Rural Fire Service as the body responsible for operational planning and fire response in rural areas. Heritage Act 2004 The Heritage Act provides for the recognition, registration and conservation of places and objects of natural and cultural significance, and establishes statutory protection for all Aboriginal places and objects within the ACT. It sets out criteria for determining heritage significance and establishes the ACT Heritage Register. Human Rights Act 2004 The Human Rights Act acknowledges that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples hold distinct cultural rights and must not be denied the right to maintain, protect and develop their culture. The Act also recognises their material and economic relationships with the land, waters and other resources. Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) The Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act is the primary Commonwealth legislation for environment and heritage protection, and outlines the environmental impact assessment process for actions that may have a significant impact on matters of national environmental significance. Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988 The ACT (Planning and Land Management) Act makes provision for the planning and management of land in the ACT. 18 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
1.9 Land planning in the ACT Planning in the ACT occurs at different scales. Land use planning: determines in a broad sense which areas of land will be used for what purpose (National Capital Plan, Territory Plan). Reserve management planning: once land use has been assigned, management plans prescribe how reserved areas such as Canberra Nature Park will be managed to achieve statutory objectives. Site planning: addresses the design of a particular area or facility (for example, design of picnic areas). This detailed planning may be done in stages, starting with a ‘concept plan’ or ‘master plan. In subsequent stages, detailed design documents are prepared for the construction of the new facilities as part of specific capital works projects. All land in Canberra Nature Park is Territory Land as defined in the Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act. Its management is the responsibility of the ACT Government; however, it is still subject to the policies of the National Capital Plan as well as the Territory Plan. The National Capital Plan aims to ensure that the Commonwealth’s National Capital interests in the Territory are protected. Most of Canberra Nature Park is included in the Hills, Ridges and Buffer Spaces land use category of the National Capital Open Space System (NCOSS). Hills, ridges and buffer spaces are to remain substantially undeveloped in order to protect the symbolic role and Australian landscape character of the hills and ridges as the scenic backdrop to the Parliamentary Zone, the city centre and other National Capital precincts and to ensure that their landscape, environmental and recreation values become an integral part of the National Capital. In the Territory Plan, established under the Planning and Development Act, Canberra Nature Park is largely included in the Non-urban Zone: NUZ3 Hills, Ridges and Buffers. General objectives for this zone cover conservation of significant cultural and natural heritage resources and wildlife corridors, opportunities for appropriate recreation, visual separation of towns, opportunities for environmental education and scientific research activities. Molonglo Gorge is included in the Non-urban Zone: NUZ4 River Corridor. General objectives for this zone cover conservation of ecological and cultural values of the ACT’s major rivers, protecting stream flow and water quality, ensuring the type and intensity of development is sustainable, providing opportunities for appropriate recreation and for environmental education and scientific research activities. An appropriate International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Protected Areas Category has been assigned to reserves by the Conservator of Flora and Fauna (the Conservator) under the Nature Conservation Act. All existing Canberra Nature Park nature reserves have been identified as IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ species management area with a primary management objective to: maintain, conserve and restore species and habitats. The objectives outlined in this management plan for Canberra Nature Park are consistent with IUCN Category IV as indicated in Appendix 3. Environment.act.gov.au | 19.
WOOLSHED AT MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) 1.10 Management responsibilities in Canberra Nature Park The Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) is the custodian of the unleased public land within Canberra Nature Park, and is responsible for managing the area to meet the objectives. Some areas not currently protected as nature reserve are also managed by the Parks and Conservation Service. Whilst there is no statutory basis for managing these areas as reserves, they are generally managed to achieve the same goals and objectives as those outlined in this plan. These areas are identified as ‘Other land managed by ACTPCS’ on zoning maps for individual reserves in Part 2 of this plan. Areas within Canberra Nature Park that have been included in the reserve system as a result of environmental offsets have their own offset management plans, which can be accessed via the ACT Offsets Register at: https://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools_resources/plans-registers/registers/offsets-register 20 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
1.10.1 Areas within Canberra Nature Park subject to lease, licence or other arrangement Rural leases Rural leases apply in Kinlyside and West MacGregor Grasslands, and over parts of Crace Grasslands, Kowen Escarpment, Rob Roy, Tuggeranong Hill and Urambi Hills nature reserves. Land Management Agreements, which include requirements to protect nature conservation values, apply in these areas (see section 10.8). Other leases Other private leases exist within Canberra Nature Park, for example, the Broadcast Australia National Transmission Station has a lease in Gungaderra Grasslands Nature Reserve. A management plan has been prepared by the lessee to protect nature conservation values within the lease area. Areas subject to licences and permits Licences and permits can be issued to undertake activities within reserves. Licences are issued under the Nature Conservation Act and the Planning and Development Act, and permits are issued under the Public Unleased Land Act 2013. Whilst the activities are not managed by the Parks and Conservation Service, the PCS generally supervises them. Utility infrastructure To service urban areas, utility infrastructure (such as water reservoirs and telecommunication towers) has been built in a majority of reserves. Some have lease arrangements. Formalised management arrangements, for example management agreements and/or codes of practice, are established between the Parks and Conservation Service and utility providers. Utility infrastructure is not shown on maps in Part 2. TELSTRA TOWER ON BLACK MOUNTAIN NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) WATER RESERVOIR MOUNT TAYLOR NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) Environment.act.gov.au | 21.
Tenancy agreements A few residential houses are within Canberra Nature Park and operate under tenancy agreements. These agreements are subject to conditions and are likely to be reviewed over the term of this plan. A variety of activities occur in several other small areas within Canberra Nature Park. These areas are generally identified as restricted access areas on the management zoning maps in Part 2 and are managed by other organisations. These arrangements may be reviewed or formalised over the life of this plan. Excluded area The Canberra National Pistol Club has a lease on the eastern side of Mount Ainslie. This area is identified as a Special Purpose Reserve, is not part of Canberra Nature Park, and the provisions of this management plan do not apply. 1.11 Review of management responsibilities and boundary adjustments Several Canberra Nature Park reserves have been extended since they were first established and not all Territory Plan boundaries align with logical on-ground boundaries, such as existing fence lines. Over the life of this plan, minor adjustments to reserve boundaries may be required to correct these anomalies. Where the boundaries adjoin unleased territory land, these minor adjustments may be carried out as Technical Amendments to the Territory Plan, provided they are consistent with the original intent of the boundary. Where adjustments are required to existing reserve boundaries that adjoin leased land, a variation to the Territory Plan may be required and public consultation will be undertaken. A review of tenancy agreements over the life of this plan may also result in the rationalisation of boundaries for some reserves. 1.12 Introduction: management actions Implementation and management responsibilities Actions 1. Develop five yearly implementation plans and, in consultation with stakeholders, annual operations plans. 2. Review reserve boundaries and tenancy agreements and implement appropriate changes to the Territory Plan Public Land overlay. 22 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) MOUNT MAJURA NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) Environment.act.gov.au | 23.
WATTLE SEEDS (PCS LIBRARY) CHAPTER 2 CONSERVING KEY NATURAL VALUES: » critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland » critically endangered Yellow Box–Red Gum Grassy Woodland » threatened plant species » threatened grassland fauna species » threatened woodland bird species » rare and uncommon plants » important ecological connections MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Threatened species and communities, native plants and animals are conserved. » The extent and condition of native vegetation and habitat connectivity are improved. » Threats are managed to reduce impacts and increase resilience to climate change. » Aboriginal cultural practices are integrated into management..
2. Plants and animals 2.1 Ecosystems 1 There have been numerous classifications used to name vegetation communities in the ACT. The current classification uses the communities described by Armstrong et al. Plant Communities of the Upper Murrumbidgee catchment in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory (Cunninghamia (2012) 13(1): 125-266). Additional native and derived vegetation communities have also been described where vegetation did not fit within the descriptions by Armstrong et al. Descriptions of these communities can be found in Technical Report 28 at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/nature-conservation/conservation-research/research-and-technical-reports The grasslands, woodlands and forests1 of Canberra Nature Park are of regional and national conservation significance due to the size and connection of vegetation patches, and the habitat they provide for rare and threatened species. Over one third of the area of Canberra Nature Park protects important areas of critically endangered Yellow Box– Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, and approximately 10% supports critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland or habitat of threatened grassland animals and plants. Several threatened plant species are found in Canberra Nature Park, along with many rare and uncommon plant species. The locations of vegetation types in Canberra Nature Park are summarised in Figure 2.1. 2.1.1 Woodland Canberra Nature Park woodlands are generally found on the deeper, more fertile soils of the middle and lower slopes of hills at altitudes between 600 and 900 metres, in areas not susceptible to cold air drainage. Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora)–Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi) Grassy Woodland, listed as a critically endangered community in the ACT and nationally, covers approximately 4370 hectares in Canberra Nature Park. In the ACT this community is made up of Yellow Box–Apple Box tall grassy woodland and Blakely’s Red Gum–Yellow Box (± White Box) tall grassy woodland, together with derived native grassland. The community has a sparse shrub layer and an understorey that contains a high diversity of grasses and forbs. Important reserves for the community include Mulligans Flat, Goorooyarroo, Kinlyside, Mount Majura, Mount Ainslie, Nadjung Mada, Red Hill, Mount Mugga Mugga, Callum Brae, Isaacs Ridge, Farrer Ridge, Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy. YELLOW BOX–BLAKELY’S RED GUM GRASSY WOODLAND IN JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK NATURE RESERVE (ANDREW TATNELL) Environment.act.gov.au | 25.
The woodland in Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo and the lower slopes of Mount Majura–Mount Ainslie is the largest known remaining patch of Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in Australia. The sites within the Red Hill–Mount Mugga Mugga–Isaacs Ridge–Callum Brae–Jerrabomberra West–Wanniassa Hills–Farrer Ridge–Mount Taylor complex is the second largest known remnant patch, exceeding 1,500 hectares. Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo is the site of the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment, a research project of international importance, with a particular focus on woodland ecology and restoration. See Chapter 9 for additional information. Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata)–Lowland Woodland to Open Forest occurs on shallow infertile hill slopes with a wide range of trees including Yellow Box, Blakely’s Red Gum, Brittle Gum (Eucalyptus mannifera), Scribbly Gum (Eucalyptus rossii), Kurrajong (Brachychiton populneus) and Parramatta Green Wattle (Acacia parramattensis). Mid-layer and ground-layer diversity is low. This woodland is largely found on Mount Majura, Mount Ainslie, Red Hill, Isaacs Ridge, Mount Taylor, Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy. Drooping She-oak is a critical foraging resource for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami). Red Box (Eucalyptus polyanthemos)–Tall Grass–Shrub Woodland to Open Forest generally occurs on lower and mid slopes with a north to north-easterly aspect, on soils derived from sedimentary rocks. It is characterised by an overstorey comprising almost entirely of Red Box. This woodland has a restricted distribution with relatively large occurrences within Rob Roy, Tuggeranong Hill, Callum Brae, Black Mountain, Aranda Bushland, Kowen Escarpment and Mount Ainslie. Snow Gum (Eucalyptus pauciflora) Grassy Woodland has a very limited distribution in the ACT and region, usually around the fringes of valley-floor frost hollows. Twenty hectares of this woodland occurs on the cooler south and south-easterly facing slopes of Mount Majura and Mount Ainslie, while small patches are associated with frost hollows within Aranda Bushland and Gungaderra Grasslands nature reserves. The representation of these woodland communities in Canberra Nature Park and other reserves in the ACT is shown in Table 2.1. TABLE 2.1 Reservation of woodland communities in Canberra Nature Park Area (hectares) % of ACT total Woodland community ACT total Reserved or managed by PCS CNP Reserves Reserved or managed by PCS CNP Reserves Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland 21,975 6,490 4,366 30% 20% Drooping She-oak Lowland Woodland to Open Forest 670 478 236 71% 35% Red Box–Tall Grass–Shrub Woodland to Open Forest 1,779 368 270 21% 15% Snow Gum Grassy Woodland 90 21 21 23% 23% Total 24,514 7,357 4,893 30% 20% The ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans (ACT Government 2019a), which supersedes the ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004), outlines conservation goals, objectives and actions for woodlands and woodland dependent species in the ACT. 26 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
ACT woodland restoration The ACT and Australian governments have contributed $3.1 million for the ACT Woodlands Restoration Project as part of a larger program to consolidate and connect 60,000 hectares of the largest remaining areas of Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in Australia. Activities include: » improving woodland habitat connectivity » enhancing woodland habitat, for example, by adding coarse woody debris and a shrub layer » improving landscape scale conservation » implementing research outcomes » encouraging community participation, including 43 community groups, schools and organisations and 18 rural landholders. Achievements include: » over 900 ha of revegetation, including 28,548 tube stocks planted and 101 km of direct seeding » enhancement and protection of 844 ha of remnant woodland (including the distribution of 4,415 tonnes of coarse woody debris) » invasive species control over an area of 4,494 ha » feral animal control over an area of 9,555 ha » establishment of 10 monitoring sites to review different treatment types and techniques. Activities towards restoring woodland areas as part of environmental offset requirements have been undertaken at Isaacs Ridge and Justice Robert Hope Park. These include, but are not limited to, weed and pest animal monitoring and control, monitoring threatened species and the critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, the addition of coarse woody debris, kangaroo monitoring and control, and revegetation. Since 2004, Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo nature reserves have been the focus of a long-term research partnership between the ACT Government and the Australian National University to better understand and rehabilitate the structure and function of box–gum woodland ecosystems. This has included: replenishing fallen timber habitat; trialling fire regimes; and removing introduced predators while reintroducing locally extinct fauna, including ‘ecosystem engineers’ such as the Eastern Bettong (Bettongia gaimardi), within a large predator-proof enclosure (see section 9.1.1). Environment.act.gov.au | 27.
FIGURE 2.1 Vegetation of Canberra Nature Park 28 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.1.2 Natural Temperate Grassland Canberra Nature Park includes around 750 hectares of natural temperate and other native grassland, located in the Jerrabomberra, Majura, Belconnen, Molonglo and Gungahlin valley floors. Natural Temperate Grassland of the South Eastern Highlands (NSW and ACT) is listed as a critically endangered community nationally and in the ACT. The ACT has some of the largest remaining patches of Natural Temperate Grassland in Australia, which represent a significant proportion of reserved areas for this community nationally (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage 2011). These areas, and connected areas of other native grassland, are also recognised as major habitat for several nationally threatened grassland animals and plants. While low plant diversity dominates grasslands within Canberra Nature Park (comprising a mix of native and exotic pasture species), there are patches of higher plant diversity within Crace, Dunlop, Gungaderra, Mulanggari and Jerrabomberra West grassland reserves. These areas have populations of several plants considered rare within the ACT. The following four grassland communities fall within the definition of Natural Temperate Grassland at an ACT and Commonwealth level (ACT Government 2017a and Commonwealth of Australia, 2016) and are protected within Canberra Nature Park. Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma spp.)–Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra)–Sedge (Juncus spp.) Grassland of Occasionally Wet Sites is most commonly found on flats or adjacent to drainage lines or wetlands, and occasionally further upslope. Waterlogging and severe frosts limit the growth of woody vegetation in this community. Within Canberra Nature Park, this community is largely restricted to the Murrumbateman sub-region of the South Eastern Highlands Bioregion, within which most of the ACT’s lowland grasslands occur. Associated species include Blown Grasses (Lachnagrostis spp.), Variable Raspwort (Haloragis heterophylla), Common Bogsedge (Schoenus apogon) and Tussock Sedge (Carex appressa). Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma spp.)–Yangabil (Austrostipa bigeniculata)–Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum) Grassland occupies a variety of landscape positions ranging from flats to mid slopes across a range of substrates. Severe frosts, hot drying winds, cracking clays and waterlogging all contribute to limiting the growth of woody plants in this community. This grassland association is also largely restricted to the Murrumbateman sub-region of the South Eastern Highlands Bioregion. The most common species are JERRABOMBERRA WEST GRASSLANDS NATURE RESERVE (CHRIS HOLLY) Environment.act.gov.au | 29.
Short Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma carphoides), Lobed Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma auriculatum), Redleg Grass (Bothriochloa macra), Yangabil (Austrostipa bigeniculata), Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra), Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum) and Small Matrush (Lomandra bracteata). Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra)–Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma spp.)–Snowgrass (Poa sieberiana) Moist Grassland is found on mid slopes and foot slopes with sedimentary or colluvial lithologies. It is predominantly distributed in the Murrumbateman sub-region, but may also be present in the small parts of the Monaro sub-region of the South Eastern Highlands Bioregion on the eastern edges of the ACT. Kangaroo Grass tends to dominate, with the other two grasses being sub-dominant. Forbs include Common Everlasting, Scaly Buttons (Leptorhynchos squamatus) and Common Woodruff (Asperula conferta). Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra)–Wattle Matrush (Lomandra filiformis)–Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma spp.)–Weeping Grass (Microlaena stipoides)–Purple Wiregrass (Aristida ramosa)–Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum) Dry Grassland is predominantly a mid and upper slope community with occasional occurrences on rocky flats adjacent to streams. Overlooking valleys or plains, these grasslands are exposed to dry hot winds, restricting woody vegetation growth. Common forbs include Bluebells (Wahlenbergia spp.), Curved Riceflower (Pimelea curviflora) and Ivy Goodenia (Goodenia hederacea). The ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans (ACT Government 2017a) provides the strategic context for the protection, management and restoration of ACT native grasslands, and guides actions aimed at conserving threatened grassland species, as well as the critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland ecological community. The strategy is a reference document on native grassland for ACT and Australian government agencies with responsibilities for nature conservation, planning and land management, and for the community and other stakeholders with an interest in native grassland conservation. The representation of Natural Temperate Grassland in Canberra Nature Park and other reserves in the ACT is shown in shown in Table 2.2. TABLE 2.2 Reservation of Natural Temperate Grassland in the ACT Natural Temperate Grassland Area (hectares) % of ACT total ACT Reserved or managed by PCS CNP Reserved or managed by PCS CNP 1,158 871 305 75% 26% ACT grasslands restoration With the support of the Australian and ACT governments, the Parks and Conservation Service is conducting a program of grassland restoration with the objective of improving and expanding habitat for threatened grassland species in several of the grassland reserves in Canberra Nature Park. The program aims to: » improve the coordination, implementation and monitoring of established management programs in grassland reserves » implement a site-specific, managed disturbance regime that utilises a combination of grazing, fire and slashing to increase habitat heterogeneity » trial the use of reinstated surface rock as habitat for grassland lizards and invertebrates (see section 2.3.3) » promote the grassland reserves and encourage community involvement. 30 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.1.3 Dry forest Canberra Nature Park supports around 2100 hectares of dry, open eucalypt forest. There are four main dry forest types within Canberra Nature Park: Red Stringybark (Eucalyptus macrorhyncha)–Scribbly Gum (Eucalyptus rossii)–Red-anthered Wallaby Grass (Rytidosperma pallidum)–Tall Grass Shrub Dry Sclerophyll Open Forest occurs on the ridges, rocky slopes and sandy low nutrient soils of the northern half of the ACT. Other dominant trees include Red Box (Eucalyptus polyanthemos) and Brittle Gum (Eucalyptus mannifera). Large parts of Black Mountain, Aranda Bushland, Gossan Hill, Bruce Ridge, Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura, Rob Roy and Kowen Escarpment nature reserves support this forest. The forests on Black Mountain and surrounding areas have developed on a large sandstone block in a landscape otherwise dominated by volcanic and alluvial soils. These characteristics have contributed to the occurrence of many uncommon plant species. Black Mountain contains significant occurrences of old growth dry forest, is the only habitat (or ACT stronghold) for 18 plant species and is a habitat for a further 23 species considered rare or uncommon in the ACT. Aranda Bushland also contains a large diversity of uncommon plant species. Mealy Bundy (Eucalyptus nortonii)–Broad-leaved Peppermint (Eucalyptus dives)–Shrubby Open Forest occurs on dry rocky volcanic slopes in Rob Roy, Mount Taylor and Kinlyside reserves. The shrub layer is dense and diverse while the groundcover is sparse. Apple Box (Eucalyptus bridgesiana)–Broad-leaved Peppermint (Eucalyptus dives)–Tall Shrub Grass Open Forest occurs on relatively moist but rocky volcanic slopes. Shrubs are common, while the understorey is grassy and supports a diversity of herbs. This community is found in Mount Taylor, Wanniassa Hills, Mount Mugga Mugga, Mount Majura, Mount Ainslie, Black Mountain, Aranda Bushland, Molonglo Gorge and Farrer Ridge nature reserves. Black Cypress Pine (Callitris endlicherii)–Brittle Gum (Eucalyptus mannifera)–Tall Dry Open Forest occurs in Molonglo Gorge and Rob Roy nature reserves. OPEN FOREST AT BLACK MOUNTAIN NATURE RESERVE (ANDREW TATNELL) Environment.act.gov.au | 31.
2.1.4 Modified vegetation/urban complex Modified vegetation/urban complex areas have undergone disturbance that has changed the vegetation structure and composition so it no longer resembles the original vegetation communities. In some areas the change is limited to clearing of the tree canopy. Some of these sites are now undergoing natural succession as shrubs colonise the cleared areas, creating derived native shrublands. These areas are usually dominated by native species but have a relatively low species diversity compared to unmodified vegetation types. In other areas the disturbance has been more intense and is ongoing, leading to a more permanent highly modified vegetation structure and composition. In the urban complex, for example, the tree and shrub layers have often been removed and groundcover replaced by disturbance-tolerant annual grasses and broadleaf weeds. The modified vegetation complex also includes areas where extensive vegetation planting has occurred with both native and exotic species. Some of the sites planted with native species may, with time, develop to a condition that is identifiable as a natural vegetation community. However, other areas will remain in a modified condition. The outcome is influenced by the purpose of the vegetation planting. 2.1.5 Riparian and aquatic vegetation Riparian vegetation occurs adjacent to watercourses, in the area above the permanent water level where a damper microclimate supports vegetation with different characteristics from adjacent dryland areas (ACT Government 2009b). Two riparian vegetation communities are present in Canberra Nature Park, primarily along the Molonglo River in Molonglo Gorge Nature Reserve. River Bottlebrush–Burgan Rocky Riparian Shrubland commonly occurs on bedrock outcrops, rocky banks and sandbars, with Tableland Aquatic and Fringing Vegetation at the water’s edge and in the river. Neither of these communities is threatened, but both play a crucial role in protecting water quality and supporting river life, including threatened fish. The riparian vegetation in Molonglo Gorge is considered to be in good condition (ACT Government 2011). The ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans (ACT Government 2018) identifies key principles for the long-term protection and viability of ACT aquatic and riparian areas. RIPARIAN VEGETATION AT MOLONGLO GORGE NATURE RESERVE (BILL PHILLIPS) 32 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.2 Threatened plants Threatened plant species and ecological communities recorded within Canberra Nature Park are listed in Table 2.3 while those on the ACT Heritage Register are listed in Table 2.4. The following nature reserves are most important for threatened plants: » Mount Majura, Mount Ainslie and Kowen Escarpment contain most of the plants of the nationally critically endangered Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis), which occurs only in the ACT. » Mount Majura, Mount Ainslie and Percival Hill support large populations (thousands of plants) of the nationally endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans). Smaller populations of this endangered daisy also occur in several other open forest, woodland and grassland reserves. » Red Hill and Crace Grasslands each support over 5000 plants of the endangered Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides). A self-seeding population has been established in an area known as Jerrabomberra East in the Majura Valley. » Mount Taylor supports a large population of the endangered Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) with isolated populations occuring on Farrer Ridge and Aranda Bushland. » Budjan Galindji Grasslands supports one of only four known populations of Ginninderra Peppercress (Lepidium ginninderrense). » Mulligans Flat supports the vulnerable Austral Toadflax (Thesium australe). » Tuggeranong Hill, McQuoids Hill, Rob Roy and Kowen Escarpment reserves support Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida), which is vulnerable nationally. SMALL PURPLE PEA (SWAINSONA RECTA) (JOHN BAKER) Environment.act.gov.au | 33.
TABLE 2.3 Threatened plant species and ecological communities found in Canberra Nature Park Ecological communities ACT NSW C/wealth Natural Temperate Grassland of the South Eastern Highlands CE CE Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland* CE CE CE Plants Austral Toadflax (Thesium australe) V V V Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides) E E E Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis) CE CE Ginninderra Peppercress (Lepidium ginninderrense) E V Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) E Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida) V V V Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) E E E Silky Swainson-pea (Swainsona sericea) V * Commonwealth and NSW listing is White Box–Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodlands and Derived Native Grasslands. Note: V = Vulnerable, E = Endangered, CE = Critically Endangered TABLE 2.4 Natural heritage sites in Canberra Nature Park listed on the ACT Heritage Register Reserve Registration Description Aranda Bushland Aranda Snow Gums The remnant Snow Gum patch is the best Canberra example of frost hollow grasslands with edging gums and native vegetation zones largely intact. Small Purple Pea Habitat for Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) Red Hill Button Wrinklewort Habitat for Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides), with over 5,500 plants at 11 separate locations Mount Taylor Small Purple Pea Habitat for Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) Note: The current ACT Heritage Register should always be consulted for the latest information before commencing works or other activities that are likely to have an impact in the landscape. BUTTON WRINKLEWORT (RUTIDOSIS LEPTORRHYNCHOIDES) (JOHN BAKER) 34 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.3 Native animals Canberra Nature Park provides habitat for at least 30 species of reptiles, 10 frogs, 185 birds, 21 native mammals (including 12 species of micro-bats) and numerous invertebrates (Wildlife Atlas of the ACT, Canberra Ornithologists Group, Canberra Nature Map, Frogwatch 2009, and Pennay 2013). Small to medium sized mammals, such as bettongs and bandicoots, disappeared from the regional landscape soon after the arrival of the fox, which was introduced into Australia in the 1870s. Eastern Bettongs (Bettongia gaimardi) and Eastern Quolls (Dasyurus viverrinus) have been reintroduced to the Mulligans Flat– Goorooyarroo Woodland Sanctuary (see section 9.1.1). Habitat fragmentation has meant that larger animals like wombats, monitor lizards and quolls are scarce close to the city and are now more often found in outlying reserves such as Rob Roy or Mount Majura. There is evidence that foxes, cats and/or simplification of habitat through burning may have had recent impacts on small mammals. For example, the Yellow-footed Antechinus (Antechinus flavipes) and Brown Antechinus (Antechinus stuartii), both marsupial mice, were previously found on Black Mountain and Mount Ainslie but have not been recorded in these areas since the early 1990s (Kukolic 1990, Devlin 1999). In contrast, Eastern Grey Kangaroo (Macropus giganteus) numbers have increased to an extent that in some situations the effect of their grazing has adversely impacted other fauna (Barton et al. 2009, Manning et al. 2013). The woodlands and grasslands of Canberra Nature Park are important habitat for numerous threatened or declining species. JUVENILE ROSENBERG’S GOANNA (VARANUS ROSENBERGI) (MATTHEW HIGGINS) Environment.act.gov.au | 35.
2.3.1 Threatened grassland fauna Threatened grassland species found in Canberra Nature Park: Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) is listed as critically endangered nationally and endangered in NSW and the ACT. The grasslands and open woodlands of Canberra Nature Park contain about 795 hectares of habitat of the Golden Sun Moth. These sites, which represent approximately 30% of known habitat in the ACT and 4% nationally, occur in Budjan Galindji, Crace, Dunlop, Gungaderra, Jarramlee, Jerrabomberra West, Mulanggari, Goorooyarroo, Kinlyside, Mount Majura and Mulligans Flat nature reserves. The Golden Sun Moth feeds on C3 grasses (see Glossary) and prefers relatively flat areas in full sun where grass is short-to-medium height with gaps between grass tussocks. Within the ACT, populations achieve highest densities in areas with a relatively high percentage cover of wallaby grasses (Rytidosperma spp), corkscrew grasses (Austrostipa spp) or the introduced Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana). Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata) is listed as endangered nationally, in Victoria and in the ACT. This species is mainly confined to higher quality native grassland (Robertson and Evans 2010). Grasslands in the Majura and Jerrabomberra valleys, including the West Jerrabomberra Nature Reserve, comprise a major proportion of the total remaining habitat of Grassland Earless Dragon. Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) is listed as a vulnerable species in the ACT, where it is known from 23 sites and 48 records (Farrow 2012). It is largely confined to Natural Temperate Grassland and more rarely to secondary grassland derived from box–gum grassy woodland. Although there is a paucity of records of the Perunga Grasshopper in the Australian National Insect Collection, it appears to be a rare species restricted to a small area of the Southern Tablelands and South-Western Slopes. The Gungahlin and Jerrabomberra grassland reserves appear to be particularly significant habitat for this species. Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) is listed as vulnerable nationally, in NSW and in the ACT. It is a small, cryptic, legless lizard that is largely confined to the ACT and nearby regions, with isolated small populations in widely separated locations in NSW and near Bendigo in Victoria. In the ACT the lizard mainly occurs along the slopes of the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee River corridors, but is also found on some adjacent outlying hills within Canberra Nature Park—Cooleman Ridge, Farrer Ridge, Isaacs Ridge, Kinlyside, McQuoids Hill, Mount Mugga Mugga, Mount Taylor, Oakey Hill, Wanniassa Hills, Red Hill, Rob Roy, The Pinnacle, Urambi Hills and Tuggeranong Hill. In the ACT, the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard is most commonly found in open, rocky sites characterised by partially embedded surface rock and the presence of native grasses and forbs and, sometimes, low shrubs. ECHIDNA (TACHYGLOSSUS ACULEATUS) (PCS LIBRARY) SHINGLEBACK (TILIQUA RUGOSA) (MARK JEKABSONS) 36 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) is listed as vulnerable nationally, in NSW and in the ACT. Striped Legless Lizards are known to occur over about 1800 hectares in four discrete grassland areas in the ACT: the Gungahlin area, the Majura Valley, land adjacent to Yarrumundi Reach on Lake Burley Griffin, and the Jerrabomberra Valley. These populations are effectively isolated by geographic and anthropogenic barriers. TABLE 2.5 Threatened grassland fauna species found in Canberra Nature Park Animals ACT NSW C/wealth Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) E E CE Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata) E E E Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) V Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) V V V Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) V V V Note: V = Vulnerable, E = Endangered, CE = Critically Endangered 2.3.2 Other grassland fauna Canberra Raspy Cricket (Cooraboorama canberrae), is a large, flightless gryllacridid (non-jumping crickets) with small vestiges of wings and long legs, and the only known member of its genus. The species has mostly been recorded within high-quality native grassland during surveys for threatened reptiles, predominantly within Canberra but also around Queanbeyan and Bungendore in NSW. GOLDEN SUN MOTH (SYNEMON PLANA) FEMALE (PCS LIBRARY) STRIPED LEGLESS LIZARD (DELMA IMPAR) (PCS LIBRARY) Environment.act.gov.au | 37.
2.3.3 Improving grassland habitat through reinstatement of surface rock In the ACT it is estimated that 95% of pre-European Natural Temperate Grassland has been destroyed or significantly altered and as part of this process extensive areas of rock have either been removed or displaced. Many fauna species use rocks and rocky outcrops as shelter from predators, extreme weather conditions and wildfires, while numerous rare and threatened flora species only persist in rocky outcrops as they provide refugia from fire, grazing and other intensive agricultural practices. The Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella), Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) and Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata) are among fauna species known to be impacted by the removal of surface rocks. The ACT Parks and Conservation Service is currently leading a research project, in collaboration with the Australian National University, that aims to determine the biodiversity conservation implications of reinstating or adding rocks into ACT grasslands. The floristic, invertebrate and reptile response to the addition of surface rock to a number of grassland sites across the ACT is being assessed in trials and these results will guide future decisions regarding further rock addition. Rock addition trials target grassland sites within the Burra Soil Landscape and other sites where there is evidence of surface rock or rocky outcrops. Rock addition will largely avoid lower slopes, where there are deeper soils and a lower likelihood of having supported surface rock. Trial sites are 20m x 20m in size, which is considered large enough to assess a biodiversity response to the treatment but small enough to not have a significant ecological impact in the event that the biodiversity response is negative. GRASSLAND EARLESS DRAGON (TYMPANOCRYPTIS LINEATA) (PCS LIBRARY) 38 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.3.4 Woodland birds Ideal woodland bird habitat has a complexity of structure and habitat elements such as fallen logs, a shrub layer and hollow-bearing trees. It generally occurs lower in the landscape on productive moist soils. Large, well- connected woodland remnants with a diversity of environments are more favourable (Paton and O’Conner 2010). The woodland within Canberra Nature Park provides significant habitat for many nationally and regionally threatened bird species (see Table 2.6). The large patch size and connectedness to woodlands in NSW make Canberra Nature Park a regional stronghold for a range of woodland birds. Some of these species are nomadic or migratory and follow flowering resources across eastern Australia. The majority of records in the ACT for both of the nationally threatened nomadic species, the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) and the Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor), have been recorded in the woodland complex that stretches from Hall through Kinlyside to Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo and then on to Mount Majura and Mount Ainslie or the Majura Training Area and Newline Quarry, south of Canberra Airport. This area is also an ACT stronghold and one of two significant breeding locations for the Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii), and provides habitat for most of the ACT listed threatened bird species. However, the Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata) and Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus) have significantly declined and are believed locally extinct in the large reserves of Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo. The threatened Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides) has been recorded within Canberra Nature Park, with nests identified near (but outside) nature reserve boundaries. Nesting can be disrupted by frequent and close visitation of people into breeding areas. Major locations for breeding of threatened woodland birds within Canberra Nature Park are at Campbell Park (lower slopes on the eastern side of Mount Ainslie), Callum Brae and Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo reserves. REGENT HONEYEATER (ANTHOCHAERA PHRYGIA) (GEOFFREY DABB) Environment.act.gov.au | 39.
TABLE 2.6 Threatened woodland birds found in Canberra Nature Park Woodland birds ACT NSW C/wealth Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus) V V Diamond Firetail (Stagonopleura guttata) V Flame Robin (Petroica phoenicea) V Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami lathami) V V Gang-gang Cockatoo (Callocephalon fimbriatum) V Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata) V V Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides) V V Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta) V V V Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) CE CE CE Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang) V V Speckled Warbler (Chthonicola sagittata) V Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) V V V Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor) CE E CE Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) V V White Winged Triller (Lalage sueurii) V Note: V = Vulnerable, E = Endangered, CE = Critically Endangered PAINTED HONEYEATER (GRANTIELLA PICTA) (GEOFFREY DABB) 40 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.3.5 Small Ant-blue butterfly The Small Ant-blue (Acrodipsas myrmecophila) is a Lycaenid butterfly with a symbiotic relationship with the Coconut Ant (Papyrius spp). While the Small Ant-blue is widespread across south-eastern Australia, it is rare and has a localised distribution. The species is listed as critically endangered in Victoria. Several breeding colonies of the Small Ant-blue have recently been discovered in the ACT, the majority within Canberra Nature Park (Bond 2019). Key management aims for the butterfly identified by Bond (2019, p3) include: » Retention of Coconut Ant colonies and the fallen timber they are utilising; » Maintaining a 5–10% cover of eucalypt saplings, wattles or other shrubs and saplings on which sap-sucking Homoptera are being attended by the Coconut Ants within the 100m around known breeding locations; and » Minimising disturbance and damage to native tree, sapling and shrub vegetation at known and possible hill‑topping sites. 2.3.6 Aquatic fauna Threatened fish and crayfish species historically or currently present in Canberra Nature Park reserves: » Murray Cod (Maccullochella peelii) (vulnerable) are present in the lower Molonglo River, up to the lower end of Molonglo Gorge; suitable habitat available, limited by low flows. » Macquarie Perch (Macquaria australasica) (endangered) were historically present; habitat limited, translocated to the upper Molonglo Gorge, very low likelihood of occurrence now. » Murray River Crayfish (Euastacus armatus) (vulnerable) were historically present in the upper and lower Molonglo River or nearby tributaries; habitat is reasonable. Actions to protect and manage these species are included in the ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans (ACT Government 2018). Other native fish present in Canberra Nature Park include the Golden Perch (Macquaria ambigua), Australian Smelt (Retropinna semoni), Western Carp Gudgeon (Hypseleotris klunzingeri) and Mountain Galaxias (Galaxias olidus). Exotic fish, especially Carp (Cyprinus carpio), heavily dominate fish numbers and fish biomass in the Molonglo River. In NSW, the Molonglo River is stocked with Rainbow Trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus) and Water Rats (Hydromys chrysogaster) are both found in the Molonglo Gorge area. 2.4 Habitat connectivity and wildlife movement Maintaining and enhancing ecological connectivity is important to achieve conservation at the landscape scale. The resilience of natural areas—their ability to persevere and adjust despite disturbances and changes in land use and climate—depends on the continuity of ecological processes such as energy flows, nutrient cycles, hydrological cycles and food webs. Natural areas should be relatively resilient if they are larger and better connected, threats are managed, and ecological processes and intact native vegetation are maintained. Much of the ACT’s high-value woodland, lowland open forest and habitat is protected within the reserve system, and most of Canberra Nature Park’s reserves are well connected to each other and/or to regionally important habitat areas outside the ACT. The only relatively isolated woodland reserve is Percival Hill. In addition to maintaining core habitat areas within reserves, away from the urban edge, significant connections to the wider landscapes of south-eastern Australia need to be maintained and built upon. These include links from Canberra Nature Park to the Murrumbidgee River, Namadgi National Park and then onto the Great Eastern Ranges ecological network (Victoria to Far North Queensland), and from Canberra Nature Park through vegetation to the north-east of the ACT (Greater Goorooyarroo) and into the South-West Flyway (woodland connection across central NSW). Environment.act.gov.au | 41.
In contrast to woodland areas, most grassland sites are fragmented, with limited connectivity. Jerrabomberra West Grasslands Nature Reserve is the only grassland reserve with good connections to woodland. Most grassland fauna, particularly the threatened lizards and insects, are unlikely to cross bitumen roads; Crace, Gungaderra and Mulanggari grassland reserves are therefore essentially isolated from each other. Dunlop and Jarramlee/West MacGregor grassland reserves are connected to native pasture and Natural Temperate Grassland patches in NSW. Figure 2.2 shows general habitat value and linkages that are key to improving connectivity and resilience across Canberra Nature Park. Several bottlenecks, or break points in connection, between habitat areas in Canberra Nature Park require protection and focused management (i.e. rehabilitation and assisted natural regeneration). These areas, as shown in Figure 2.2 are: 1. between Goorooyarroo and Mount Majura, and Mount Majura and the Military Training Area 2. from Black Mountain and Aranda Bushland, through Mount Painter and Pinnacle, to Kama Nature Reserve and Molonglo River corridor 3. from Mount Taylor to Cooleman Ridge and then onto McQuoids Hill and the Murrumbidgee River corridor 4. between Farrer Ridge and Mount Taylor 5. from Wanniassa Hills to woodland in the NSW area of Jerrabomberra 6. between Tuggeranong Hill and the Murrumbidgee River corridor. Since 2012, links and habitat condition across the Belconnen Hills, the Majura Valley and areas around Callum Brae have been improved as part of a wider woodland restoration program. Enhancing the biodiversity value of urban areas is an important component of the ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23. Wildlife connectivity between Canberra Nature Park reserves can be improved by strengthening connections between reserves through the urban areas, particularly during planning and design activities. A key goal of the ACT Government’s Living Infrastructure Plan (ACT Government 2019c) is to progress toward providing Canberra’s urban footprint with the equivalent benefits of 30% tree canopy cover and 30% permeable surfaces. Action 9 of the Living Infrastructure Plan is to develop an Urban Forest Strategy—a strategic plan for the public urban forest that outlines how the urban forest can be maintained and enhanced to improve amenity in a changing climate and deliver biodiversity outcomes. Commencing 2021, with Transport Canberra and City Services the agency responsible, the ACT Urban Forest Strategy 2021–2045 (ACT Government 2021a) sets out six key objectives for Canberra’s urban forest: 1. Protect the urban forest. 2. Grow a resilient forest. 3. Balance and diversify the urban forest. 4. Take an ecological approach and support biodiversity. 5. Develop infrastructure to support the urban forest and liveability. 6. Partner with the community to grow and maintain the urban forest. The Parks and Conservation Service will continue to liaise with Transport Canberra and City Services and other agencies and land managers to help improve connectivity between reserves, through urban areas, and across the broader landscape. 42 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
FIGURE 2.2 Landscape connectivity across Canberra Nature Park Note: Developed by combining information from vegetation, street-tree and land use maps, together with satellite foliage cover and tree- density data, and analysis of the spatial relationships among habitat patches (Barrett and Love 2012). Key linkages between the identified habitat patches were identified and their functionality assessed on the basis of findings by CSIRO that most animals of southern Australian woodlands and forests will usually not cross a canopy gap of more than 100 metres, and will not travel more than 1.1 kilometres away from a patch of at least 10 hectares of suitable living habitat (Doerr et al. 2010). Environment.act.gov.au | 43.
2.5 Management considerations 2.5.1 Past land use “The country is perfectly sound, well-watered with extensive meadows of rich land on either side of the rivers, contains very fine limestone, slate, sandstone and granite fit for building, with sufficient timber for every useful purpose.” Charles Throsby Smith, 1821. Prior to European settlement of the Canberra region, native grasslands, maintained by a combination of cold air drainage, water logging and Aboriginal burning, covered the valley floors. The mid and lower slopes were mainly covered in woodlands, while the rocky ridges supported mainly dry forest. From the 1820s, pastoral activity brought significant change. Livestock grazed grasslands; woodlands and forests were cleared or thinned to increase grass growth and provide timber; and exotic species of plants and animals were established. In 1911, all lands became leasehold to support the establishment of the National Capital. The short-term nature of leases limited the degree of clearing, cultivation and pasture improvement that could occur. Consequently, the grasslands and woodlands of the ACT were much less impacted than elsewhere in southern Australia by agricultural innovations such as chemical fertilisers, exotic pasture species and new technology such as diesel tractors. During early development of the National Capital, reforestation of Canberra’s denuded ridges was seen as a priority, and landscape-scale plantings were undertaken, many with non-local Australian native species. The need for infrastructure grew with Canberra, and the hills also became preferred sites for power, water and telecommunications infrastructure. As a result of past land use and land planning, Canberra Nature Park has a range of factors that influence management, including: » large and well-connected remnant woodland patches » altered soil fertility and infestations of agricultural weeds » urban infrastructure such as reservoirs, power lines, telecommunication towers, underground cables and rubbish tips » an extensive urban interface boundary and associated urban edge issues, such as increased impacts from weeds, domestic animals, fire protection and flood mitigation measures » a well-established history of recreational use » areas of dry forest that are regenerating from previous clearing, and woodlands and grasslands that are generally in better condition than those outside of the ACT » a current management focus on conservation and restoration of native vegetation. 44 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
RECOVERY OF VEGETATION ON BLACK MOUNTAIN FOLLOWING CLEARING IN THE 1800S. TOP: CIRCA 1900 (NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA); MIDDLE: 1920 (NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA); BOTTOM: 2011 (SARAH RYAN). COMPOSITE IMAGE (SARAH RYAN). Environment.act.gov.au | 45.
2.5.2 Grazing management Grazing strongly influences which species are present in native grasslands and grassy woodlands ecosystems. Without grazing, dense grass swards of a few species may form. With moderate grazing the swards are broken up, allowing space for a diversity of plants to grow. Intense grazing can remove almost the entire sward, which may result in adverse impacts on the grassland, such as erosion and loss of species. In modified grassland communities, particularly where herbivores and/or their predators have been removed, the natural processes that influence grass biomass and structure are usually disrupted and can become too high, too low, or too homogeneous to support a diverse grassland community. Maintaining heterogeneity is important to provide habitat for a range of species (see Figure 2.4). In general, moderation of grazing pressure, while retaining some areas subject to higher and lower grazing pressure, is considered a sound strategy for conserving biodiversity. FIGURE 2.4 Conceptual relationships between grass structure and some fauna species in grasslands and open woodland in south-eastern Australia Note: Figure 2.4 is based on native pastures in midsummer, and measurement values would be lower in winter and higher in spring. Grass herbage mass measures refer to dry weight of standing grass, not including dead non-standing material and non-grass plants. Figure 2.4 is based on quantitative measurements made by the ACT Government and published values in Howland et al. 2014, Howland et al. 2016a and 2016b. Grazing of livestock (sheep or cattle) is used in some Canberra Nature Park reserves to reduce bushfire fuel levels in restricted fenced areas. In some areas, grazing is used to maintain a grass structure favourable for threatened fauna. 46 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
The Nature Conservation Act prohibits taking non-native animals into a nature reserve except as permitted by the Conservator through an Activities Declaration (see Glossary) or a Nature Conservation Licence. The Conservator’s consent for grazing of livestock is given through a licence issued by the Planning and Land Authority under Part 9.11 of the Planning and Development Act. Licences are monitored by the Parks and Conservation Service to ensure the required outcomes are achieved. The density of Eastern Grey Kangaroos is high in several Canberra Nature Park reserves, and heavy grazing by kangaroos can threaten the survival of some threatened species. Eastern Grey Kangaroos have been culled annually since 2009 to improve ecosystem condition in some Canberra Nature Park reserves. Kangaroos are only culled in locations where high numbers pose a threat to ecosystem condition. Eastern Grey Kangaroos are integral to the conservation and healthy functioning of grassy ecosystems. As such, the number to cull is based on the number of kangaroos that can be maintained in the reserve and ensure good ecosystem condition and diversity. Management of Eastern Grey Kangaroo populations is undertaken in accordance with the Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan (ACT Government 2017b), which was developed through extensive and ongoing research into kangaroo ecology and grazing impacts. Rabbits also exert heavy grazing pressure in some reserves. While it is not possible to eliminate rabbits from Canberra Nature Park or individual reserves, integrated management strategies aim to reduce rabbit abundance to a level where any impacts are considered acceptable. Management of the grassy layer in Canberra Nature Park reserves is conducted in accordance with the ACT Native Grassland and Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategies and informed by the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program (CEMP), which incorporates annual herbage mass monitoring by the Herbage Mass Working Group within the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. The enclosure of 1286 hectares of land inside a predator-proof fence in Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo nature reserves (the Sanctuary—see section 9.1.1) presents special challenges for the management of wildlife populations and grazing within the enclosed area. The ACT Government, the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust, the Australian National University and the Ngunnawal community are currently developing a strategy for the Sanctuary. CATTLE ON COOLEMAN RIDGE NATURE RESERVE (LOIS PADGHAM) Environment.act.gov.au | 47.
2.5.3 Fire Using fire for ecological outcomes Many Australian vegetation communities and native animals have evolved with fire as a natural ecosystem process. Indeed, some species rely upon particular fire regimes for regeneration or habitat maintenance. Fire is applied in Canberra Nature Park to promote ecological values, such as improved habitat for native plants and animals; for example, mosaic burning to promote habitat heterogeneity for the Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata), or to encourage the regeneration or germination of particular species. Such ecological burning is based on research, planned in consultation with reserve managers and ecologists, and depends on suitable weather, fuel conditions and consideration of the plant or animal ecology. Ecological guidelines for fire, fuel and access management operations can be found at: https://www.environment.act.gov.au/ACT-parks- conservation/bushfire_management/fuel_management/bushfire-operations-plan Aboriginal cultural burning Recognising the significant role of Aboriginal burning in the evolution and maintenance of Australian ecosystems, the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate is working towards the integration of traditional ecological knowledge, including traditional burning practices, into the management of Canberra Nature Park. Involvement of the local Ngunnawal community in implementing and monitoring cultural–ecological burns meets the dual objectives of maintaining and improving ecological function and habitat for threatened species, and supporting the continuing connection of Aboriginal people to Country (see section 4.2). ECOLOGICAL BURNING IN GOOROOYARROO NATURE RESERVE (LOIS PADGHAM) 48 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Fire fuel management Much of Canberra Nature Park borders suburban development, which must be protected from the risk of fire. While fuel reduction activities can reduce both the structure and diversity of vegetation, and increase susceptibility to weed invasion, prescribed burning can also help conserve biodiversity by promoting a mosaic of fire regimes and habitat states. The primary legislation for bushfire management in the ACT is the Emergencies Act 2004, which requires the development of a Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (SBMP). Under the Act, the land manager must, as far as practicable, ensure the area is managed in accordance with the SBMP. If there is an inconsistency between the SBMP and reserve management plans, the reserve management plans have no effect to the extent of the inconsistency. The SBMP is a five-year plan with a ten-year outlook. Under the SBMP, fire management plans have been prepared and represented spatially in Regional Fire Management Plans, which establish the major fire fuel, access and infrastructure management actions over ten years. The Regional Fire Management Plans are reviewed every five years. Bushfire Operational Plans, also required under the Emergencies Act, are prepared annually to detail fuel management activities for particular land areas such as individual Canberra Nature Park reserves. Decisions on the management of fire fuel in natural areas consider: » protecting human life and valuable built or ecological assets » the level of fuel accumulation » fire history » ecological fire thresholds; for example, the number of years required between fires to allow species to flower and set seed or for fauna species populations to re-establish » a desire for a mosaic of burnt areas across the ACT with different periods since they were last burnt providing for age class diversity in woodland and forest ecosystems » minimising the loss of structural habitat elements such as keystone trees, coarse woody debris and regenerating vegetation. FUEL REDUCTION BURN ON BLACK MOUNTAIN NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY) CLEANING FIRE VEHICLE TO AVOID SPREADING WEEDS (PCS LIBRARY) Environment.act.gov.au | 49.
Some Canberra Nature Park reserves that border suburban development include Inner or Outer Asset Protection Zones. These can be up to several hundred metres wide where shrubs, grasses and other fire fuels are kept at low levels to reduce bushfire intensity and the risk of ember attack to adjacent suburbs. This reduces both the structure and diversity of vegetation within this area and increases susceptibility to weed invasion. For reserves with a long urban edge, the area impacted can be large; for example, around 30% of Red Hill Nature Reserve is managed as an Inner or Outer Asset Protection Zone. Fire fuel management activities are subject to evidence-based ecological guidelines that aim to protect rare, threatened and fire-sensitive species; for example: » Leaf litter is removed to protect the fire-sensitive Black Cypress Pine (Callitris endlicheri) on Black Mountain and in Aranda Bushland. » Spring fuel reduction burns are avoided on Mount Ainslie to protect breeding woodland bird habitat, and avoid stands of mature Drooping She-oaks (Allocasurina verticullata), which provide food for the Glossy Black‑cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami). » Autumn fuel reduction burns are avoided on Tuggeranong Hill to prevent impact on the autumn honeyeater migration. Planned burns in Canberra Nature Park are generally relatively small patch burns which also aim to minimise any negative impacts. 2.5.4 Weeds Invasive weeds have significant impacts on biodiversity through competition with native plants and degradation of habitat. In particular, weeds are recognised as a significant threat to many of the ACT’s threatened species and ecological communities and to the integrity of other vegetation communities. Canberra Nature Park is particularly susceptible to weed invasion because of its large interface with the urban edge and the relatively high level of disturbance from infrastructure construction, maintenance activities and high levels of public use. Weeds include both exotic and native Australian species that do not occur naturally in Canberra Nature Park, such as Cootamundra Wattle (Acacia baileyana). Invasive grasses, such as African Lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula), Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana) and Serrated Tussock (Nassella trichotoma), are major threats to the grassy ecosystems of Canberra Nature Park. If not controlled, these invasive grasses out- compete native grasses and wildflowers. They also increase fire fuel loads. COOTAMUNDRA WATTLE (ACACIA BAILEYANA) (PCS LIBRARY) 50 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
The Parks and Conservation Service implements an annual Invasive Weeds Operations Plan, which assigns priority for weed control based on assessment of the risk of invasiveness, impacts, potential distribution, and the feasibility of coordinated control (including cost, weed persistence and current distribution). Priority is given to higher risk weeds, protecting higher value environmental, economic and social assets, and undertaking follow- up control to protect prior investment. ParkCare groups also make an important contribution to weed control in Canberra Nature Park. Of around 600 introduced plant species found in Canberra Nature Park, 76 species (13%) are targeted for control. However, most of the control work is taken up by only 15 of these species (3% of all introduced plants). These 15 species are widespread weeds. There are also many species that currently have only a restricted occurrence within Canberra Nature Park and are targeted for control before they become widespread. Examples include Spanish Heath (Erica lusitanica), Gazania (Gazania spp.), Chinese Pistachio (Pistachio chinensis), South African Daisy (Osteospermum ecklonis) and Western Australian Bluebell Creeper (Billardiera heterophylla). Grazing, slashing and fire are sometimes used to target herbaceous weed species and can be an alternative to, or combined with, herbicide treatment. Revegetation can help to prevent weeds re-establishing, especially in grasslands and grassy woodlands. Biological and integrated control methods may also be used when available. Manual removal of weeds is undertaken by many ParkCare groups. 2.5.5 Pest animals Pest animals are exotic species that cause environmental, social and economic damage through predation of native animals, grazing of native plants, competition with native animals for food and habitat, and altering the structure and function of ecosystems. Pest animals also contribute to the spread of weeds and pathogens and reduce social amenity in high-use areas and adjacent suburbs. Operations to control pest animals and repair damage are a significant management cost. Pest animal species established in Canberra Nature Park include rabbits, foxes, cats, Indian Mynas and European Wasps. Feral pigs, wild dogs and feral deer are not widespread, but do occur in other protected areas, such as Namadgi National Park. It is a management priority to prevent the increase in distribution and abundance of these species. Rabbits Rabbits represent the greatest potential threat to the integrity of the reserve system, as reflected in the level of effort and expenditure invested in programs for their control. Grazing pressure from rabbits and digging of warrens adversely affect the condition of nature reserves. Rabbit diggings represent a hazard to reserve users on foot and can cause soil erosion. Rabbits also invade neighbouring suburbs, damage parklands, consume ornamental and food plants and dig up garden beds. It is not possible to eliminate rabbits from Canberra Nature Park. The aim of control is to reduce rabbit abundance to a level where impacts are considered acceptable and then to maintain low abundance through persistent follow-up monitoring and control. This includes removing rabbit harbour such as blackberry and destroying warrens. Research on rabbit control under the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment has contributed to the development of principles and techniques used for rabbit management, published in a best practice guide for the ACT (ACT Government 2015a). Help from community groups to locate and monitor warrens has been an important factor in the success of control programs in Canberra Nature Park (for example, Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura and Red Hill). Fostering continued community engagement in this aspect of rabbit control will facilitate future programs. Coordination with neighbouring landholders also helps achieve successful rabbit control. Environment.act.gov.au | 51.
Foxes Predation by foxes is a major threat to the survival of native Australian fauna, with medium-sized mammals, ground dwelling and semi-arboreal mammals (such as possums), ground-nesting birds, and freshwater turtles at greatest risk (NSW Scientific Committee 1998). Fox populations are a major concern when planning to reintroduce locally-extinct vulnerable species such as the Eastern Bettong or Bush Stone Curlew to Canberra reserves. Initially, species have been reintroduced behind a fox-proof fence at Mulligans Flat. Foxes also have economic impacts on lamb and poultry producers and are a nuisance as an urban scavenger. Cost-effective and efficient fox management depends on landscape-scale control programs, which primarily use 1080 poison baiting, a nationally-agreed control method. However, 1080 baiting has restricted use close to urban areas, and fox control within much of Canberra Nature Park remains limited to reserves that are not close to residential areas until other methods become available (for example, fertility control or new toxins). Resource intensive methods such as shooting, trapping and exclusion fencing are only feasible for application around high- value conservation areas or for the protection of threatened species. Cats There are around 56,000 owned cats in the ACT, together with an estimated stray cat population of around 25,000 (Eyles and Mulvaney 2013). Reserves surrounded by suburbs, such as Red Hill or Farrer Ridge, may have hundreds of roaming owned or stray cats. Some stray cats become feral. Research has shown that domestic and stray cats kill a large range of native species including birds, sugar gliders, bats, lizards, frogs and a range of invertebrates (Barratt 1997, 1998). In recognition of the impact that roaming owned cats can have on wildlife, cat containment areas (where cats must be contained on their owner’s property) have been declared in several parts of recently developed suburban Canberra adjacent to nature reserves. There are currently no practical options for broad-scale stray/feral cat control in Canberra Nature Park other than cat containment in adjacent suburbs. Nationally agreed methods of controlling feral cats, such as shooting and trapping, are prohibitively labour-intensive and may be ineffective, but may have some limited application in protecting high-value species and assets. The ACT Cat Plan 2021–31 (ACT Government 2021b) and ACT Cat Plan Implementation Plan 2021 (ACT Government 2021c) guide the management of cats—owned, semi-owned, unowned and feral—over the next decade. Feral pigs Feral pigs have many adverse impacts on the environment, especially when digging for and feeding on native plants and animals, wallowing and disturbing soils in dams, waterholes and other moist areas, destabilising creek banks and accelerating erosion. Feral pigs also spread weeds and disease and can present a direct physical risk to visitors. Predation, habitat degradation, competition and disease transmission by feral pigs is listed as a key threatening process under the EPBC Act. Feral pigs are not widespread in Canberra Nature Park, but are present in low densities in Rob Roy, Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment nature reserves, where they are subject to reactive control programs. Feral pigs have occasionally been observed in Goorooyarroo and Black Mountain reserves. The most cost-effective method for managing feral pigs in the majority of Canberra Nature Park reserves is the early detection and control of new incursions. Feral pig incursions in all reserves are controlled in accordance with nationally agreed methods, mainly trapping and 1080 baiting in reserves that are not close to residential areas. 52 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Wild dogs Wild dogs have been observed occasionally in Rob Roy Nature Reserve. DNA evidence indicates that wild dogs in the ACT are essentially dingoes with a small proportion of domestic dog genes. However, as pure dingoes cannot be distinguished from part dingoes in the field, they are managed under the ACT Pest Animal Strategy as a single entity (i.e. as wild dogs). The ACT Government aims to maintain viable populations of wild dogs in conservation areas but they are a potential risk to livestock where their habitat is adjacent to or overlaps with rural properties, are urban scavengers, prey on pets and are a reservoir for canine diseases (ACT Government 2012). Wild dogs are currently managed reactively through trapping in response to livestock losses in the areas adjacent to Rob Roy. Effective broad-scale control of established wild dog populations relies on 1080 baiting as part of an integrated management program. However, 1080 baiting cannot be used close to urban areas, which therefore excludes most Canberra Nature Park reserves. European Wasps European Wasp (Vespula germanica) nests may contain thousands of wasps that are capable of stripping areas around a nest virtually bare of other invertebrates, thereby reducing the food resource available to birds and lizards. European wasps can be highly aggressive if disturbed by people or their pets. Nests are routinely destroyed in high-risk areas (e.g. around picnic and barbecue facilities) on public land. Nests found in Canberra Nature Park will continue to be destroyed. European Honeybees European Honeybees (Apis mellifera) interact with a wide variety of Australian plants and animals, and further research is needed to understand their full impact. Honeybees can reduce seed set in some native species, particularly bird-pollinated plants, and can impact on native birds such as honeyeaters, or on native bees by significantly reducing the amount of available resource. Honeybees also compete with native wildlife for tree hollows. Until there is greater knowledge of the impacts and control of European Honeybees, the current policy of exclusion of hives from nature reserves (ACT Government 2016) will continue. European Honeybee hives are not permitted in Canberra Nature Park without approval from the Parks and Conservation Service. Indian Myna The introduced species, Indian (Common) Myna (Acridotheres tristis), is a significant competitor for hollows and poses a threat to species such as the Superb Parrot. Research (Grarock et al. 2012) has found a significant negative relationship between the establishment of the Indian Myna and the abundance of the hollow-nesting birds. Indian Mynas also negatively impact the abundance of small birds, which are driven out of defended territories, and cause an urban nuisance through noise and scavenging behaviour. A community trapping program has operated in suburban Canberra since 2005 and has significantly reduced the abundance of Indian Mynas in the urban area. Continued monitoring of native bird abundance will help to evaluate the benefits of the trapping program to native species. The efficacy and cost-effectiveness of removing eggs and hatchlings from nesting hollows could also be explored as a management option, particularly in any areas where threatened species, such as the Superb Parrot, are known to nest. Environment.act.gov.au | 53.
Feral deer Increasing populations of feral deer species are an emerging pest animal management issue in the ACT and region. Deer form tracks and wallows, browse selectively, damage young trees and shrubs by antler rubbing, compete with livestock and macropods for grazing, and are a potential reservoir of stock disease (ACT Government 2012). Collisions with feral deer represent a road safety hazard and browsing of urban gardens is an urban nuisance. Fallow Deer and Sambar Deer have been reported within Canberra Nature Park reserves, but there is no indication that feral deer have established resident populations. In other jurisdictions, established peri-urban deer populations have become a significant management issue and the priority for Canberra Nature Park is to prevent their establishment. Ground shooting according to standard operating procedures is the only option currently available to remove deer from reserve areas. 2.5.6 Biosecurity Phytophthora Phytophthora is an introduced microscopic soil-borne water mould that causes root rot, and kills many native trees and shrubs by invading and destroying their root systems. When conditions are favourable (warm and moist), Phytophthora releases spores into the surrounding soil which are easily spread through stormwater, track construction and visitor use. The disease is a nationally listed threatening process. It is difficult to limit the spread of Phytophthora, but current best practice includes fencing affected areas, restricting public access and applying hygiene measures such as sanitising tools, machinery, shoes and tyres. There is currently limited knowledge of the distribution of this pathogen within the ACT, and the Parks and Conservation Service has commenced soil testing to map sites. Phytophthora cinnamomi has been identified on Black Mountain (Pratt 1973) and the Parks and Conservation Service will undertake action to limit the impact of the disease in the reserve and at other sites, if identified. Dieback The term ‘dieback’ describes a widespread decline of plant health. In the ACT, the decline since about 2004 of Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi) appears to be widespread and affecting all age classes. Dieback has also been widely observed recently in Apple Box (E. bridgesiana) and to a lesser degree in Ribbon Gum (E. viminalis) and Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora). The cause of the condition decline is multifactorial but influenced by declining habitat condition and climatic factors (Cowood et al. 2018, Lynch et al. 2018). Further research is needed to better understand the historic extent, range and causes of dieback in the ACT, to monitor the condition of susceptible species, and assess the implications for conservation of these Eucalyptus species and dependent fauna, of mature native trees, and of Yellow Box–Red Gum Woodland in the ACT. 54 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.5.7 Climate change 2 Perennial grasses can be classified as either C3 or C4 plants. These terms refer to the different pathways that plants use to capture carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. All species have the more primitive C3 pathway, but the additional C4 pathway evolved in species in the wet and dry tropics. For further information refer to the Glossary. The ACT is already experiencing warming, with more hot days and fewer cold nights (Cowood et al. 2018). Future rainfall is predicted to be lower than the current average, less evenly distributed and less predictable. There have been, and will continue to be, more intense and frequent storm events, wetter summers and autumns, and drier winters and springs. The higher temperature, greater storm run-off and shift from winter to summer rainfall is likely to result in overall drier conditions and an increase in the number of high fire danger days and bushfire events (Webb 2011, Hughes and Steffen 2014). In the last 50 years, CO2 levels in the atmosphere have risen by 25% and will continue to rise. Increased CO2 concentrations favour less efficient users of CO2 and water, such as shrubs and other woody plants, over grasses (Berry and Roderick 2005). Higher CO2 also favours C4 grass species over C3 species.2 C4 and C3 plants have different structures and qualities as food plants for animals, and some herbivores can only feed on one or the other. For example, the endangered Golden Sun Moth is only able to feed on C3 grasses (Richter et al. 2011). Climate change means the ACT’s native species are likely to experience quite different local conditions than they do now. They will need to adapt to those changes, expand or change their range, or go extinct (Doerr et al. 2013). Species with restricted climatic ranges, small populations and limited ability to adapt or migrate are most likely to suffer dramatic declines or local extinction as suitable habitat disappears in the ACT (ACT Government 2012b). A biodiversity refugia project has assessed where native plants are expected to persist under climate change (MacKenzie et al. 2019). Likely implications of climate change (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage 2011) for ecological communities in Canberra Nature Park are: » grasslands—woodland invasion due to reductions in both cold air drainage and water logging and increased CO2 level, reduced productivity, reduced cover of native grasses and annual forbs, increased soil erosion, increased weed invasion particularly of C4 grasses, and changes in species composition » woodlands—lower spring productivity, loss of geophytic species, increased shrubiness, increases in currently cold-limited weeds and feral species, changes in habitat structure, and changes in species composition » dry forests—higher frequency of extreme droughts and fires. Potential implications of climate change for threatened species and ecosystems in Canberra Nature Park include increasing susceptibility of: » Blakely’s Red Gum and Snow Gums to drought-related moisture stress, disease and insect attack » Grassland Earless Dragon to reductions in spring rainfall, grassland productivity and grass cover » Striped Legless Lizard to drought-related reductions in spring forbs and new grass growth » Golden Sun Moth to changes in grassland productivity, shifts in species composition and/or weed invasion of critical inter-tussock spaces » Regent Honeyeater and Superb Parrot breeding cycles to lower nectar yields in spring-flowering eucalypts (for example, Yellow Box) » Superb Parrot to reduced availability of nesting hollows in mature Blakely’s Red Gum » insectivorous birds (for example, Scarlet, Flame and Hooded Robins) to changes in habitat heterogeneity and habitat structure. Environment.act.gov.au | 55.
The woodlands and open forests of Canberra Nature Park are relatively large and well connected, contain a high native plant diversity (usually in excess of 250 native plant species) and are in a relatively resilient state. However, most of the grasslands have low plant diversity and exist in relatively small, highly fragmented patches, making them more vulnerable to disturbance and climate change. To help ecosystems and species adapt in Canberra Nature Park, reserve managers will focus on options that emphasise natural resilience and are likely to benefit biodiversity regardless of the degree of climate change. Approaches might include: » increasing resilience by controlling or managing ‘non-climate change’ ecological stressors such as weeds, native and introduced herbivores, introduced predators, and urban edge effects » for landscapes—identifying, managing and protecting potential climate refugia, and connections across communities and environmental gradients (in the Canberra area, refugia tend to be cooler moist sites and can occur at the landscape scale, such as Molonglo Gorge or south facing slopes, or at the micro-level, such as in rock crevices) » for ecological communities—promoting resilience through maintenance of high native species diversity and, in some cases, accepting transitions to new structural community types » for species—maintaining large, well connected and genetically diverse populations. Responses to climate change already observed in Canberra Nature Park Wildlife and plants within Canberra Nature Park have already changed behaviour, distributional range, time of flowering or breeding activity in response to climate change. Local examples include the following: » Before 2005, the Superb Parrot was only an occasional spring or summer vagrant within the ACT. Today more than 100 birds are observed in the ACT during spring and summer, with two established nesting sites and overwintering birds. Modelling by the Australian National University has found the bioclimatic range to be highly sensitive to climate change, with predicted range contractions of 47% by 2050 and 75% by 2070. The range is already shifting to the south-east, with the woodland within Canberra Nature Park becoming increasingly important habitat (Manning et al., in review). » Frogwatch data and expert opinion suggest that several ACT frog species are starting breeding calls earlier in the year. » The extreme drought coupled with heavy kangaroo grazing from 2006 to 2010 caused a dramatic reduction in the Grassland Earless Dragon population, to the point where there was a real risk of local extinction. The lizard population has been recovering since drought conditions ended but remains at risk due to factors including increased temperatures as a result of climate change. » Several weed species previously restricted to more coastal areas have recently been found in Canberra Nature Park surviving winters and reproducing, whereas previously they would have been killed or restricted by cold temperatures. These species include Moth Vine (Araujia sericifera), Madeira Vine (Anredera cordifolia), Cobbler’s Pegs (Bidens pilosa) and Madagascan Fireweed (Senecio madagascariensis). 56 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2.6 Plants and animals: management policies, objectives and actions Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity Policies » Ecological communities and threatened species will be managed in accordance with relevant ACT ecosystem strategies and threatened species action plans. » Reserve management will be evidence based and incorporate adaptive management. » Reserve management will prioritise: • conserving threatened species and threatened ecological communities, particularly where the reserve is identified as critical habitat • maintaining and improving the extent and condition of native vegetation • maintaining and improving habitat connectivity • protecting significant or sensitive vegetation communities, and plant and animal species, from adverse impacts of physical disturbance • minimising the impact of other threats to native plants, animals and ecological communities. Objectives » Threatened and rare ecological communities (Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, Snow Gum Grassy Woodland, Red Box woodland/open forest and native grasslands) are conserved and rehabilitated. » The diversity, extent, condition, connectivity and resilience of native ecological communities are maintained and/ or improved. » Threatened native animal species, and the diversity of other animal populations, are conserved. » Habitat for woodland birds and other native fauna is conserved and improved. » Habitat connectivity is maintained and strengthened to support ecosystem resilience. » Threats to native plants, animals and ecological communities are minimised. Environment.act.gov.au | 57.
Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity Actions 3. Prepare and promote management guidelines, as required, for threatened and significant ecological communities, plants and animals. 4. Plan and implement (assisted) rehabilitation of ecological communities, priority plant species and animal habitat. 5. Prioritise restoration/regeneration activities that: • increase habitat size, condition and connection • reduce perimeter-to-area ratio of habitat patches • assist species movement within and across reserves that contain bottlenecks or break points in connectivity. 6. Make information on the locations of significant and/or sensitive ecological communities, plants and animal habitat accessible to land managers, ParkCarers and contractors. 7. Identify opportunities and requirements to protect habitat diversity and refugia at the landscape and reserve scale. 8. Provide opportunities and support for adjoining landholders and the community to improve ecosystems. 9. Incorporate traditional ecological knowledge and practices into reserve management. 10. Investigate and implement measures to improve genetic diversity of isolated populations of endangered plants and animals including reintroductions of species where and if conditions are suitable and natural recruitment is not possible. 11. Utilise mechanisms under the Nature Conservation Act for the Conservator to close reserves to protect conservation values, for example in key woodland bird habitat during the spring/summer breeding season. 12. Liaise/share information with other agencies and land managers as required to: • encourage the protection of scattered trees, particularly mature or hollow bearing trees, in modified landscapes, including urban and peri-urban areas • minimise impacts from new developments or infrastructure in areas key for connectivity • explore possibilities for improving connections within reserves, between reserves, through the urban areas, and to the wider regional landscape • ensure consideration of connectivity and linkages in the implementation of the Urban Forest Strategy. 58 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity Grazing management Objectives » Conservation grazing regimes support protection of threatened species and improve ecosystem function. » Overabundant animal species are managed to reduce impacts on reserve values. Actions 13. Manage Eastern Grey Kangaroo populations in accordance with the Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan. 14. Manage and actively monitor total grazing pressure and impacts to achieve conservation objectives, particularly in grassy ecosystems where threatened animal species have particular habitat requirements. 15. Utilise strategic grazing (by livestock) if necessary to achieve conservation and Bushfire Operational Plan objectives. Fire Objectives » Ecological burning regimes are established, implemented and monitored. » Cultural burning practices are established, implemented and monitored. » The adverse impacts of fire-fuel management on biodiversity values are minimised while life and property are protected. Actions 16. Undertake fire management activities in accordance with the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT, and with relevant Regional Fire Management Plans and annual Bushfire Operational Plans. 17. Integrate the requirements of the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT with the protection of threatened, rare or fire-sensitive species, their habitat and ecological function by: • implementing ecological guidelines for fire fuel and access management operations, protection measures to support the long-term maintenance of plant and animal communities, and retaining habitat refugia by utilising landscape mosaic burning regimes • monitoring the effectiveness of burning in contributing to conservation outcomes and fire risk mitigation outcomes • monitoring the impacts of prescribed burning and unplanned fire. 18. Manage fire to achieve conservation objectives in grassland, woodland and forest ecosystems. 19. Plan and implement cultural burns with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. Environment.act.gov.au | 59.
Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity Weeds Objectives » Weeds are excluded, eradicated, controlled or contained to minimise and mitigate adverse impacts on conservation values. Actions 20. Actively manage invasive weeds in accordance with the ACT Weeds Strategy and annual invasive weeds operations plan. 21. Systematically map and monitor the distribution and spread of weeds to detect trends and improve effectiveness of control programs for conservation. 22. Strengthen partnerships with adjacent land managers, volunteer groups, citizen scientists and the community in weed management to improve cost-effectiveness and reduce weed re-invasion including early detection of new incursions, surveillance and coordinated weed control. 23. Make information accessible to help the community to identify and report new weed species of concern. Pest animals Objective » Pest animals are excluded, eradicated or controlled to minimise adverse impacts on conservation values. Actions 24. Monitor pest animals and implement management actions in accordance with the ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy and annual vertebrate pest operations plans. 25. Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of pest animal control in relation to conservation outcomes. 26. Strengthen partnerships with adjacent land managers and the community in pest animal management to improve cost-effectiveness and reduce pest re-invasion including surveillance and coordinated pest control. Biosecurity Objectives » Diseases are excluded, eradicated, controlled or contained to minimise and mitigate adverse impacts on values. » Research capacity on biosecurity, in particular invasive species, is increased. Actions 27. Identify options for the early control or exclusion of biosecurity risks. 28. Coordinate disease control in cooperation with adjoining land managers. 29. Support collaborative invasive species research with research partners. 60 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity Climate change Objectives » Ecosystem resilience to a changing climate is strengthened. » Knowledge and understanding of the implications of climate change for the values of Canberra Nature Park are improved and inform management planning and decision making. Actions 30. Assess risk and resilience of species and ecological communities to climate change impacts and prioritise the development of management responses for those most at risk. 31. Promote resilience to climate change by: • maintaining and restoring species and habitat diversity in ecological communities • identifying, managing and protecting potential climate refugia and landscape connections • maintaining large, well connected and genetically diverse populations. 32. Conduct research and trial additional management responses to improve resilience in species and ecological communities to climate change impacts. Environment.act.gov.au | 61.
CHAPTER 3 PROTECTING THE LANDSCAPE: » Ngunnawal people and their ancestors managed the cultural landscape for over 25,000 years. » Griffin’s design for Canberra was inspired by topography. » The varied geology produces distinctive variety in plant species. » Water features provide small but important habitats. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Landscape character is protected from visual impacts. » Geological features are protected and interpreted. » Soils and watercourses are protected from erosion. MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS).
3. Land and water 3.1 Landscapes The Ngunnawal people, Traditional Custodians of the Canberra region, view Canberra Nature Park as a cultural landscape, derived from thousands of years of Aboriginal land management and embedded with the spirits and stories of their ancestors. Many landscape features have cultural significance as having been created by ancestral beings or as places of ceremony. The natural beauty of the landscape played a large part in the selection of the ‘Limestone Plains’ as the site for the National Capital and declaration of the Federal Capital Territory in 1911, renamed the Australian Capital Territory in 1938. Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahoney Griffin used the landscape as inspiration in their design for Canberra, and envisioned that the hills surrounding the city (now largely protected as part of Canberra Nature Park) should be kept free of development and re-vegetated with native forests. The hills and ridges that surround and frame Canberra’s urban areas, the major lakes, river corridors, distant mountains and bushland all combine to form the National Capital Open Space System, which provides the visual backdrop and landscape setting for the National Capital. Planning for Canberra consciously incorporates landscape objectives, and protection of landscape character is important in all Canberra Nature Park reserves. This plan recognises the role the landscape plays in shaping the city and enriching the lives of people who live here. 3.2 Geology, soils and land surface condition Rocks are the foundations of the earth’s landscapes. Their physical and chemical make-up and their interaction with air and water, together with movements in the Earth’s crust, affect the form of the landscape and the composition of the soils. These in turn are crucial factors in the nature and distribution of plant and animal communities. An understanding of geological and landform features is key to understanding the ecological and human history of any area and significant geological and geomorphological sites warrant protection. Environment.act.gov.au | 63.
FIGURE 3.1 Soil Landscapes of Canberra Nature Park 64 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
The landscape and soils of Canberra Nature Park reflect the geological history of the area. The underlying rocks were formed between 480 and 400 million years ago by the deposition of silt and sand into a deep ocean. Subsequent tectonic plate movements resulted in extensive folding and faulting, volcanic activity, and periods of both submergence and weathering. As a result, geology varies across Canberra Nature Park reserves. Black Mountain, for example, is mostly Black Mountain Sandstone, formed from sediment deposited in a fan on the sea floor around 440 million years ago, later uplifted and exposed as the surrounding softer plain eroded away. Other reserves with rocks formed from sediments include those of the Canberra Formation (for example, Mulligans Flat) and the Pittman Formation (for example, Molonglo Gorge). The geology of other reserves results from volcanic activity, with rocks belonging to either the Laidlaw Volcanics (for example, Mount Mugga Mugga and Tuggeranong Hill) or the Hawkins Suite (for example, Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura and Mount Painter). This variation in underlying geology has produced some distinctive variations in plant species, such as on Black Mountain, which has a significantly richer shrub and forb diversity. The geological history also influences soil characteristics. The long periods of weathering have produced soils that are relatively infertile, with low organic matter and poor structure. On the upper slopes the soils are shallow, gravelly and prone to erosion. On lower slopes the soils are deeper duplex soils, characterised by sandy topsoils overlying clayey, reddish and yellowish, low fertility subsoils. The subsoils are very vulnerable to erosion if the topsoil is lost. Soils on the plains are deeper and more fertile (Ryan 2011). The ACT Soil Landscapes dataset maps 55 soil landscape units across the ACT, based on a report by Cook et al. (2019). Figure 3.1 shows the soil landscapes of Canberra Nature Park. The data set, which includes links to full soil landscape reports with characteristics for each unit, is accessible at: https://actmapi-actgov.opendata.arcgis.com/ datasets/act-soil-landscapes/explore ROAD CUTTING ON BLACK MOUNTAIN NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) Environment.act.gov.au | 65.
3.2.1 Geological features Significant geological features in Canberra Nature Park include Red Hill hornfels exposures, Mulligans Flat quartz reef outcrop, Mount Majura fossil outcrops, Crace Grasslands hill cuesta, Molonglo Gorge bedded sediments, Tuggeranong Parkway Cutting at Oakey Hill and Mount Taylor, and Gossan Hill’s complex geology including a gossan. Appendix 4 provides more detail on geological features in Canberra Nature Park reserves. Sites on the ACT Heritage Register are in Table 3.1. TABLE 3.1 Geological sites listed on the ACT Heritage Register Reserve Registration Description Oakey Hill / Mount Taylor Tuggeranong Parkway Road Cutting Significant for the interpretation of the volcanic stratigraphy of the Canberra area during the Silurian period (around 400 million years ago). Note: The current ACT Heritage Register should always be consulted for the latest information before commencing works or other activities that are likely to have an impact in the landscape. MOLONGLO GORGE NATURE RESERVE (BRIAN PRINCE).
3.3 Water As most of Canberra Nature Park consists of hills and ridges, much of the hydrology relates to ephemeral first order streams and gullies, and former farm dams. The exceptions are: » a 15.5 kilometre stretch of the Molonglo River as it flows through Molonglo Gorge » the headwaters of Ginninderra, Gungaderra and Sullivans creeks within Mulligans Flat, Goorooyarroo and Nadjung Mada reserves » a mid-section of Gungaderra Creek as it flows across Gungaderra Grassland reserve » an upper part of Ginninderra Creek as it flows on the eastern edge of Percival Hill. Although minor in nature, gullies and drainage lines usually support denser vegetation growth and provide a variety of habitats and local refuges that are important for maintaining the biodiversity within reserves. Some dams within Canberra Nature Park are surveyed annually as part of the Frogwatch program. Up to seven species of frogs have been recorded in dams within reserves on the urban fringe, such as in Dunlop Grasslands, Callum Brae and Mulligans Flat, which have amongst the highest recorded frog diversities within the ACT and surrounding NSW (Frogwatch 2009). A few regionally rare plant species are found within or on the edge of reserve dams, including Spring Starflower (Alisma plantago-aquatica) in Dunlop Grasslands, River Buttercup (Ranunculus inundatus) in the Aranda Snow Gums area, and Small Knotweed (Polygonum plebeium) in Mulligans Flat and Isaacs Ridge. A deeply incised and eroding channel within Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve drains into Ginninderra Creek. Other areas of Gungaderra Creek, Ginninderra Creek and Sullivans Creek within Canberra Nature Park have largely been cleared of native vegetation and are dominated by exotic pasture grasses such as Phalaris (Phalaris aquatica), Yorkshire Fog (Holcus lanatus) and Tall Fescue (Festuca elatior). Drainage lines and dam edges, because of their extra soil moisture and bare soil, may allow for rapid invasion and dense infestation of weed species such as Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana) or Blackberry (Rubus fruticosus aggregate). Environment.act.gov.au | 67.
3.4 Management considerations 3.4.1 Landscapes The National Capital Plan aims to conserve and enhance the landscape features that give the National Capital its character and setting, and protection of landscape is important in managing Canberra Nature Park. Any activities, works and structures within Canberra Nature Park that have potential to interrupt or modify significant landscape elements such as skylines, ridgelines and major views will be discouraged and assessed for visual impact. Clearing vegetation to allow appreciation of vistas from lookouts, such as Red Hill, may conflict with the protection of ecological values. Management of vegetation should avoid or at least minimise impacts on ecological values, particularly threatened ecosystems and species, connectivity and wildlife corridors. 3.4.2 Geological features Significant geological features must be protected from unnecessary disturbance, and interpretation of some of these sites would increase community understanding of their importance. 3.4.3 Soil and erosion Sharp (2011) reported that areas of major active gully erosion and undercutting occurred within Callum Brae, Mount Painter, Kinlyside, Mount Mugga Mugga and Urambi Hills. Minor gully erosion in drainage lines was also present in Aranda Bushland, Goorooyarroo, Isaacs Ridge and Red Hill. High levels of recreational use can lead to erosion of walking tracks and adjacent areas. The creation of informal tracks can lead to further erosion. MOUNT TAYLOR NATURE RESERVE (LOIS PADGHAM) 68 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Fire and fire suppression, extreme fire and flood events, overgrazing, inappropriate recreation and poor maintenance of roads, trails and tracks can lead to significantly increased erosion, causing loss of vegetation, siltation of rivers and streams, lower water quality and the loss of ecological values. Impacts may be greater during droughts when ground cover is reduced. To minimise erosion, planning for activities or works that may cause physical disturbance needs to take into consideration factors such as soil type, slope, type of disturbance, season, climatic conditions, location and capacity for remediation. For example, fire planners use an ArcGIS tool to determine erosion prone areas, and to assess how the erosion risk changes depending on fire severity. 3.5 Land and water: management policies, objectives and actions LAND AND WATER Policies » Activities, works or infrastructure that adversely impact on the landscapes, soils, geological sites or hydrology of Canberra Nature Park will be avoided or minimised. Landscapes Objectives » The visual amenity of Canberra Nature Park’s hills, ridges and buffer spaces is retained to protect the landscape setting of the city. Actions 33. Provide input into design proposals and other works to ensure visual intrusion on the landscape is minimised. Geology, soils and land surface condition Objectives » Geological values, soils and land surface condition are protected and improved. Actions 34. Identify, map and protect significant geological sites from disturbance. 35. Analyse soil maps and hydrogeological data to identify risks and areas for monitoring and remediation. 36. Minimise erosion through grazing management, fire management, revegetation, reinstatement of coarse woody debris and other appropriate mechanisms. 37. Minimise activities that cause physical disturbance to geological features and soil and land surface condition, and impacts on hydrology. Water Objectives » The condition of creeks, drainage lines and dams is maintained and improved where required. Actions 38. Protect creeks, drainage lines and dams from disturbance. 39. Rehabilitate damaged creeks, drainage lines and dams and improve the condition of aquatic habitats. Environment.act.gov.au | 69.
CHAPTER 4 CONNECTING TO COUNTRY: » Ngunnawal people have an ongoing deep connection to Country. » All Aboriginal places and objects are protected. » Significant Aboriginal places are throughout the reserves. » Registered sites include grinding grooves, ochre quarries, and stone artefacts. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Connection to Country is maintained through land management activities. » Access to Country for cultural and social purposes is supported. » Interpretation of Aboriginal cultural heritage is by Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. ABORIGINAL GRINDING GROOVES, TUGGERANONG HILL NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY).
4. Aboriginal connection to Country 4.1 Aboriginal heritage “All landscapes contain the imprint of human use. The way perceptions, beliefs, stories, experiences and practices give shape, form and meaning to the landscape is termed a cultural landscape.” (Australian Heritage Commission 1998). Ngunnawal people and their ancestors occupied and actively managed the landscape of the Canberra region for more than 25,000 years prior to pastoral settlement, through traditional burning and other sustainable land management practices. The collecting of seasonal foods such as the Bogong Moths (Agrotis infusa), Mountain Pepper (Tasmannia lanceolata) and other delicacies, and annual initiation ceremonies, marriages, corroborees and trade brought large gatherings of Aboriginal people from far and wide to Ngunnawal Country. These gatherings were essential to exchange knowledge and maintain spiritual, social and environmental connectivity between traditional caretakers. Significant landscape features such as hills, mountains and ridgelines aided navigation and provided vantage points. In addition, many have cultural significance as features created by ancestral beings or as places of ceremony. Lowland Canberra was rich in food such as kangaroos, lizards, turtles, yabbies, fish, frogs and edible plants. Trees and other plants were used to build shelter and create tools, weapons, canoes, coolamons, baskets and rope. Quarries provided stone for the manufacture of tools and ochre for art, decoration and ceremony. Ngunnawal people continued to make use of traditional food supplies until at least the mid-nineteenth century. As pastoral occupation was initially relatively limited, the Ngunnawal were probably able to utilise the tablelands and mountains in a traditional manner with only slight modifications. However, with the extension and intensification of pastoral activity, the depletion of traditional food supplies, disease and other factors, the Ngunnawal appear to have become increasingly reliant on relationships with settlers and, in time, appear to have been absorbed into the colonial economy, working and living on various settlements in the region (Thunderstone 2019). The Ngunnawal people continue to feel a deep responsibility to preserve the spirit and stories of their ancestors, embedded throughout the landscape. Neighbouring language groups also maintain a strong association with the region through their ancestral relationships with the area. Environment.act.gov.au | 71.
4.1.1 Aboriginal places and objects Table 4.1 shows Aboriginal places (not including artefact scatters or scarred trees) within Canberra Nature Park that are listed on the ACT Heritage Register. Many other sites, predominantly isolated stone artefacts or artefact scatters, are also listed on the register. It is important to note that there are many more Aboriginal places of cultural and heritage significance throughout Canberra Nature Park that are, as yet, unrecorded. TABLE 4.1 Aboriginal places (not including artefact scatters or scarred trees) within Canberra Nature Park listed on the ACT Heritage Register Reserve Registration Description Gossan Hill Aboriginal ochre quarry and historic mining site Aboriginal ochre quarry and stone artefact site, which shows evidence of ochre extraction. Percival Hill Aboriginal Grinding Groves Aboriginal stone grinding site. Tuggeranong Hill Theodore Aboriginal Artefact Grinding Site Aboriginal stone grinding site. Note: The current ACT Heritage Register should always be consulted for the latest information before commencing works or other activities that are likely to have an impact in the landscape. The Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations of the Canberra region view all Aboriginal places and objects as an important part of their history and want not only to have them protected but also to have a greater involvement in their ongoing management and maintenance. All Aboriginal places and objects in the ACT are protected under the Heritage Act 2004 and must not be disturbed. Anyone finding an (unregistered) Aboriginal object or place has an obligation to report it to the Heritage Council. If a person finds what they think is an Aboriginal heritage object (or place), they should not move it or do anything that will impact it. They should note if it is under threat (for example, by machinery or vandalism) and alert the ACT Heritage Council. ABORIGINAL ARTEFACT, FARRER RIDGE NATURE RESERVE (LOIS PADGHAM) ABORIGINAL ARTEFACT, MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (LOIS PADGHAM) 72 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
4.2 Contemporary Aboriginal connection to Country Recognition of Ngunnawal people’s right to speak for Country, and the acknowledgement of and respect for their lore, songlines, custom, language, cultural protocols, land management and cultural practices, is critical to the cultural integrity and identity of Ngunnawal people and their ongoing connection to Country. When Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people care for the land, they also care for their culture. The Ngunnawal people have an ongoing strong cultural and spiritual relationship with the landscape. Working on Country gives Aboriginal people a sense of personal pride and affirms their identity through a cultural belonging and connection to the land. ‘Caring for Country’ is a term often used to describe sustainable land management practices and initiatives led by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. These practices view the land and its inhabitants holistically and play a key role in cultural continuation and the improvement of socio-economic and health outcomes. The use of the term ‘Country’ for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples is not just in regards to a place but is an all-encompassing term that includes all living things, the culture and the communities connected to the land. It acknowledges people’s deep personal, spiritual and cultural connection to the land and the significance land has as the lifeblood of culture. The ACT Government acknowledges that connection to Country holds spiritual, social, historical, cultural and economic importance for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and that being actively engaged in managing land maintains their cultural identity and has direct benefits to community health and financial well‑being. 4.2.1 Caring for Country—Cultural resources Ngunnawal people and the broader Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community may utilise Canberra Nature Park for cultural and social purposes that are culturally appropriate. These uses could include ceremonies, gatherings, fishing, cooking, healing and resource collection. Together with Traditional Custodians, a cultural resource plan is being developed to guide these activities across Canberra Nature Park. 4.3 The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD) manages 77% of Ngunnawal Country. The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee (for the purpose of brevity Dhawura Ngunnawal Committee) engages, connects and works with the EPSDD to identify and implement cultural understanding within the Directorate and to provide guidance, direction and decisions to the Environment Division on environmental and land management matters including land, fire, air and water, to better manage Ngunnawal Country together on EPSDD managed lands. Environment.act.gov.au | 73.
4.4 Murumbung Yurung Murra Network Aboriginal staff work in various roles across the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate and come together as the Murumbung Yurung Murra Network for the purpose of peer support, mentoring and advocacy for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff within the directorate. Members of the network also participate in the delivery of cultural activities to assist with educating EPSDD staff and the broader community on the Aboriginal culture of the ACT. 4.5 ACT Aboriginal Fire Management Framework The Parks and Conservation Service has an ACT Aboriginal Fire Management Framework as part of its commitments in the annual ACT Bushfire Operational Plans. The framework establishes a set of guidelines and principles for rejuvenation of cultural burning practices in the ACT. While the primary purpose is cultural renewal, other outcomes include the renewal of native vegetation, safeguarding culturally significant sites, hazard reduction and maintaining the health of groundwater sources and water catchment areas. 4.6 Cultural water flows The ACT is wholly situated within the Murrumbidgee River Catchment, which feeds into the Murray-Darling Basin. The Murray-Darling Basin Plan requires the identification of Indigenous cultural and spiritual values in future water planning and management. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority Water Resource Plans Part 14 Guidelines have been developed to assist state and territory governments in meeting these requirements. ABORIGINAL CONSULTATION AT MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (BRIAN PRINCE) 74 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Cultural flows are defined by the Murray Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations (MLDRIN) as “water entitlements that are legally and beneficially owned by Indigenous Nations of a sufficient and adequate quantity and quality, to improve the spiritual, cultural, environmental, social and economic conditions of those Indigenous Nations.” (MLDRIN 2007). In developing an ACT Water Resource Plan as part of its commitment under the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, the ACT has consulted with Traditional Custodians to identify the objectives and outcomes of Indigenous people in relation to their water values and uses and also regarding their views on cultural flows. This requires consideration of water-related sites culturally significant in the ACT, including within Canberra Nature Park. ACT’s surface water and groundwater resource plans received accreditation by the Commonwealth Government in June 2020. The Water Resource Plans aim to support and protect Aboriginal objectives, values and uses identified through water resource planning engagement activities. This will be achieved through a fit‑for‑purpose approach via the ACT Water Strategy, the ACT Environmental Flow Guidelines and associated rules that protect flows, and a number of land and catchment management plans. 4.7 Management considerations Recognition of Aboriginal culture, protection and conservation of Aboriginal heritage places and objects, and ongoing connection by Aboriginal people to their Country are important considerations for this reserve management plan. The following considerations and issues are pertinent to management. » Under the Heritage Act, Representative Aboriginal Organisations have a formal, statutory role in Aboriginal heritage assessment and management in the ACT. » Consultation with Aboriginal people (particularly Traditional Custodians) is a crucial first step in managing Aboriginal cultural heritage places. » Guidance for conserving and managing places of cultural significance is provided by the Australia ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of Places of Cultural Significance (the Burra Charter). » Recreation and tourism activities need careful consideration where they could be incompatible with the significance or management objectives of an Aboriginal cultural heritage place. » A strategic approach to the interpretation of Aboriginal cultural heritage should be adopted, involving an inventory of all sites, knowledge about them and their significance, and considering all places within a broader cultural landscape framework. » All Aboriginal places and objects, including artefact scatters, are considered to be significant by the Ngunnawal community, and Ngunnawal people generally express the desire for all such sites to be left in situ wherever feasible. » Aboriginal ecological knowledge, and the interests of Ngunnawal people in managing the environment as a cultural landscape, make an important contribution to reserve management and should be actively facilitated. » Access to Canberra Nature Park by Aboriginal people for cultural purposes should be addressed in guidelines prepared in consultation with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. The guidelines should consider whether restrictions need to be imposed regarding cultural sensitivity of some information. » The potential for dual naming of reserves and places within them should be considered in consultation with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations . Environment.act.gov.au | 75.
Management of Aboriginal cultural heritage needs to consider: » the extent to which any proposal maintains and strengthens Aboriginal cultural connections to Country » how best to recognise the interests of Aboriginal people in the protection and conservation of their heritage, including their involvement in managing cultural information and research, including data » how to make provision for access by Aboriginal people to their sites and places, including access for transferring cultural knowledge or gathering materials for cultural or ceremonial purposes, and vehicle access by elders to sites not open to public vehicles » the extent to which management can assist in developing employment, education, training and economic opportunities for Aboriginal people » the best means to protect and conserve Aboriginal sites and objects, and plan for risks » the level of and timing access by visitors that will be permitted to Aboriginal cultural heritage places (ranging from prohibition to open access) in recognition of cultural sensitivity » the interpretation of Aboriginal cultural heritage places as part of the recreation, tourism and education policies in the plan. Not providing information can be a form of protection in some circumstances » the desire of Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to undertake the interpretation of their cultural heritage within Canberra Nature Park. The principles for heritage management as outlined in Ask First: A guide to respecting Indigenous heritage places and values (Australian Heritage Commission 2002a) state that that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people: » are the primary source of information on the value of their heritage and how this is best conserved » must have an active role in any Indigenous heritage planning process » must have input into primary decision-making in relation to Indigenous heritage so they can continue to fulfil their obligations towards this heritage » must control intellectual property and other information relating specifically to their heritage, as this may be an integral aspect of its heritage value. 4.8 Aboriginal connection to Country: management policies, objectives and actions Aboriginal connection to Country Policies » Aboriginal connection with Country, past and present, is acknowledged and will continue to be supported. » Aboriginal heritage places and objects will be protected and managed in accordance with statutory requirements and the Burra Charter and its guidelines. » The principles of Ask First and Free, Prior and Informed Consent will guide engagement with Aboriginal people to identify, conserve and interpret Aboriginal heritage. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians will be involved in managing Canberra Nature Park as a living cultural landscape. » Aboriginal cultural rights will be respected in accordance with the Human Rights Act 2004. 76 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Aboriginal connection to Country Aboriginal connection to Country Objectives » The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee works with PCS to guide management of Canberra Nature Park. » Cooperative management arrangements for Canberra Nature Park are established with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. » Canberra Nature Park provides a venue to connect Aboriginal people to Country. » Aboriginal cultural values, including places and objects, are protected and conserved. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians are actively involved in conserving and interpreting Aboriginal cultural heritage. » Traditional knowledge is incorporated into reserve management to improve environmental and cultural outcomes. » Community awareness of Aboriginal cultural heritage and connection to Country is increased. » The cultural landscape values and Aboriginal history of the reserves are better understood and interpreted. » Canberra Nature Park reserves are jointly named with an appropriate name identified by Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. Actions 40. Work with the Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee and Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to progress cooperative management arrangements for Canberra Nature Park. 41. Develop a strategic approach to protecting, managing and interpreting Aboriginal cultural heritage, led by Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. 42. Undertake an assessment of Aboriginal cultural heritage across Canberra Nature Park in partnership with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians, Representative Aboriginal Organisations and the ACT Heritage Council. 43. Encourage and facilitate opportunistic heritage surveys when favourable conditions arise, for example after fires. 44. Develop conservation management plans (approved through ACT Heritage Council) for selected Aboriginal heritage places, with the early involvement of Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations. 45. Work with the Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee to increase the involvement of Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians in management activities, including traditional burning practices, and to achieve their objectives for cultural water flows. 46. Incorporate and implement the aspirations, values, practices and protocols of the Ngunnawal people in legislation and EPSDD policy. 47. Continue to assess Aboriginal heritage values prior to works within Canberra Nature Park and modify proposals to avoid interference with or damage to Aboriginal heritage places and/or objects, and report any Aboriginal sites or objects found to the ACT Heritage Council. 48. Consult with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians on the naming of new reserves, or dual naming of existing reserves with Ngunnawal language. 49. Deliver Aboriginal cultural awareness training for Parks and Conservation staff and relevant contractors. 50. Prepare a Cultural Resource Management Plan with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to facilitate ongoing living cultural connections and access to natural resources and locations for cultural purposes, while guiding their sustainable use and conservation. Environment.act.gov.au | 77.
OLD FENCE ON MOUNT MAJURA NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) CHAPTER 5 RECOGNISING HISTORY: » 1820s – European settlement commenced with grazing of sheep and cattle. » 1911 – Federal Capital Territory established » 1912 – Griffins’ design for Canberra. » ACT Heritage Register includes significant heritage places. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Knowledge about heritage is improved. » Cultural values are promoted. » Threats to heritage places are managed. » Conservation management plans are developed for significant heritage places..
5. Historic (non-Aboriginal) heritage 5.1 From first European settlement The first pastoralists to explore the Canberra region relied on the intimate knowledge of Aboriginal guides. Charles Throsby, Joseph Wild and James Vaughan are credited with the first exploration of the ‘Limestone Plains’ around 1820, with further excursions extending Throsby’s recording of the area over the next few years. Throsby’s reports of fertile plains and well supplied rivers soon attracted settlers to the area. Settlement of the region commenced in the 1820s, when Joshua John Moore was granted 2,000 acres (810 hectares) covering the area of the present Canberra city centre. Moore called his station ‘Canberry’ after the name given by the Ngunnawal people who had occupied the district for millennia. In 1825, James Ainslie drove sheep down to the district for Robert Campbell and occupied land at the base of Mount Pleasant near the Limestone (Molonglo) River. He called the area ‘Pialigo’. A stone cottage was constructed (Limestone Cottage) and this was later extended to become Duntroon House. The Campbell family, who named the property ‘Duntroon’ after they took up residence, then acquired further land extending to Queanbeyan. The Limestone Plains lay close to the ‘limits of location’ set by Governor Darling in 1829 for settlement in NSW. Settlement was not approved west of the Murrumbidgee, although squatters soon moved into the mountains across the river. Early settlement was initially dominated by large pastoral properties, such as ‘Lanyon’, ‘Tuggeranong’, ‘Yarralumla’ and ‘Duntroon’, and often held by absentee landlords. Closer settlement was encouraged by the NSW Government through the Crown Land Acts 1861, which allowed selectors to purchase government land in lots of moderate size, without auction. ‘Free selectors’, who were required to live on their properties, set up farms in the Ginninderra district and the Majura Valley. The focus of early settlement was grazing, with sheep grazed mainly on the eastern side of the Murrumbidgee River and cattle in the mountains west of the river. There was wheat farming on the plains at Tuggeranong and Ginninderra, and mixed farming on the Molonglo floodplain and in the valleys of the Ginninderra and Majura creeks. The pattern of large freehold stations and small farms persisted until 1911, when the decision to establish the new Federal Capital Territory in the Limestone Plains region was formally declared. 5.2 Post federation The Federal Capital Territory (later renamed the Australian Capital Territory) was created on 1 January 1911, when the NSW Government ceded 2,360 square kilometres of land, including the seaport of Jervis Bay, to the Commonwealth Government. In 1912 Walter Burley Griffin won the design competition for the layout of Canberra, principally because of his sensitivity to the surrounding landscape and its central role in shaping the city design. Environment.act.gov.au | 79.
In 1919, as elsewhere in Australia, landholdings were resumed by the government and subdivided for settlement of returned soldiers as part of a repatriation scheme. This included areas at Yarralumla, Duntroon, Lanyon, Tuggeranong and Charnwood. A small number of historic heritage places remain in some Canberra Nature Park reserves from 19th and early 20th century use. Table 5.1 lists historic places identified on the ACT Heritage Register. 5.2.1 Cultural heritage plantings In the 1920s Walter Burley Griffin initiated re-vegetation projects on the then denuded hills around Canberra. For example: » Mount Mugga Mugga—Argyle Apple (Eucalyptus cinerea), White Box (E. albens) and Golden Wattle (Acacia pycnantha) » Mount Majura—Kurrajong (Brachychiton populnea) and Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata) » Red Hill—Crimson Bottlebrush (Callistemon citrinus) and Rosemary Grevillea (Grevillea rosmarinifolia)—listed in the ACT Heritage Register in November 2018. These were largely implemented under the supervision of Chief Nurseryman Charles Weston. Later tree plantings have also been undertaken in a number of reserves, for example: » Mount Pleasant, Mount Mugga Mugga and Red Hill—Sydney Blue Gum (E. saligna) » O’Connor Ridge—Radiata Pine (Pinus radiata) While some of these plantings have biodiversity, heritage or landscape value, others are exotic or non-local species and a potential weed source. As a long term project, the Parks and Conservation Service will work to document management direction for individual plantings. Consultation will be undertaken with the community. DUNTROON DAIRY (ACT HERITAGE) 80 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
TABLE 5.1 Historic heritage places listed on the ACT Heritage Register Reserve Registration Description Callum Brae & Jerrabomberra West Callum Brae Precinct A small part of the heritage-listed precinct is within Callum Brae and Jerrabomberra West nature reserves. The Callum Brae Precinct (including homestead, fences and outbuildings) provides a significant example of a successful World War 1 Federal Capital Territory soldier settlement lease. Jerrabomberra West Grasslands Woden Homestead and Environs The Woden Homestead and environs includes an early homestead (outside the reserve) that has been continuously occupied and managed as an agricultural enterprise. Pastoral management practices in the native grasslands in the north of the property (within the reserve) have ensured the survival of threatened species and ecosystems including the Grassland Earless Dragon, the Golden Sun Moth and Perunga Grasshopper, Natural Temperate Grassland and Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Melrose Travelling Stock Route Heritage value for past stock management practices. Molonglo Gorge Kowen Cultural Precinct The Kowen Cultural Precinct includes several ruins and disused buildings relating to rural 19th century life. The precinct includes a small part of the nature reserve. Mount Pleasant Duntroon Dairy The Duntroon Dairy was constructed before September 1832 and is the oldest standing structure in the ACT. A conservation management plan was prepared in 2013 (ACT Government 2013a). Mulligans Flat Old Coach Road Old Coach Road (Bungendore to Ginninderra) is important for understanding the land use and function of 19th century rural road and transport systems in the region. Mulligans Flat Ploughlands The Mulligans Flat ploughlands show important evidence of a distinctive farming process and a way of life using draught animals. Red Hill Red Hill Historic Plantings The Red Hill historic plantings of various red flowering plants are evidence of the Griffins’ vision to ‘paint’ the once denuded hills of Canberra using different vegetation at different locations. The plantings provide a direct, living connection to the Griffins’ vision expressed over a century ago which was an innovative, unique approach to revegetation and is one of the earliest known plantings in the ACT for landscape restoration. Note: The current ACT Heritage Register should always be consulted for the latest information before commencing works or other activities that are likely to have an impact in the landscape. Places of heritage interest, but not listed on the ACT Heritage Register include: » remnants of huts or cottages in Mulligans Flat, Goorooyarroo, Crace Grasslands, Mount Painter, Mount Pleasant, Farrer Ridge, Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy » two school sites in Mulligans Flat (constructed in 1896 and 1913) » ACT border markers in Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo » remnants of old fences » old quarries on Mount Ainslie, Black Mountain and Red Hill, which were used in the early construction of Canberra » remnants of mining on Gungahlin Hill. Environment.act.gov.au | 81.
5.3 Management considerations Under the ACT Heritage Act, all ACT Government agencies are required to identify, protect and manage heritage places and objects for which they are responsible. The Act also provides for the preparation of Conservation Management Plans and Heritage Guidelines for the protection of places of heritage significance. While some places and objects in Canberra Nature Park are included on the ACT Heritage Register, many more, in particular Aboriginal artefacts, are still to be identified. The Heritage Register should always be consulted for the latest information before commencing works or other activities that will have any impacts on heritage places. Cultural heritage management best practices are set out in the Australia ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of Places of Cultural Significance (the Burra Charter) (Australia ICOMOS 2013). Issues and opportunities around cultural heritage management in Canberra Nature Park include: » improving knowledge about heritage places and objects, values and significance » managing threats to the physical fabric of heritage places » promoting community appreciation of the cultural values of the reserves. There are opportunities to better understand the historic heritage of Canberra Nature Park though systematic and opportunistic heritage surveys, historical research and documenting knowledge held by the community. Threats to historic heritage features and places include fire, weed infestations, damage by visitors, high impact recreational activities, management practices, and alterations to physical fabric through refurbishment or redevelopment. Any works on places of historic heritage significance must be guided by the Burra Charter. Informing and educating visitors about the historic heritage of Canberra Nature Park can enrich their experiences, increase their appreciation of the cultural values of the reserves and encourage minimal impact behaviour. PUBLIC SCHOOL AT MULLIGANS FLAT 1913 (NO LONGER EXISTING) (PCS LIBRARY) 82 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
5.4 Historic heritage: management policies, objectives and actions Historic (non-Aboriginal) heritage Policies » Historic heritage places and objects will be protected and managed in accordance with statutory requirements and the Burra Charter and its guidelines. » The history of past land use and occupation will be reflected in named places and interpretive material. » Descendants of families with a strong historical association with places in the reserves, and local historians, will be respected and involved in heritage management. Objectives » Historic heritage places and objects are protected and conserved. » Awareness of historic heritage, including past land use and the legacy for reserves today, is increased. » The community is engaged in managing and conserving historic heritage places. Actions 51. Protect, manage and interpret historic heritage including: • investigating historic heritage values before commencing works and modifying proposals to avoid impact • encouraging research and promoting the results where appropriate • recognising community attachment to heritage places and involving the community in management and interpretation • mapping all historic plantings and documenting management direction in consultation with the community • monitoring heritage places. 52. Develop and review conservation management plans for significant historic heritage places and implement works as specified. Environment.act.gov.au | 83.
CHAPTER 6 RESERVE MANAGEMENT ZONES: » Zone 1 Core Conservation: areas of high conservation values, sensitive to disturbance » Zone 2 Conservation and Landscape: areas less sensitive to disturbance MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Management of Zone 1 – aims to avoid disturbance from infrastructure; high impact activities preferred outside reserves. » Management of Zone 2 – aims to direct damaging activities to previously disturbed areas. » Access restrictions apply to some areas, such as rural leases. MANAGEMENT TRAIL AT MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS).
6. Zoning and access 6.1 Reserve management zones The purpose of zoning in Canberra Nature Park is to ensure that any impacts from activities such as the construction of recreational facilities, utility infrastructure or other disturbances are directed into the less sensitive parts of Canberra Nature Park and to outside of reserves, where conservation values are less likely to be compromised. Management zones will also be one of the factors considered before approving large recreation group events in reserves. For example, the presence of nesting woodland birds or numerous previous events in the same area could influence an approval. Canberra Nature Park has been divided into two zones (see Table 6.1) based on the distribution of natural and cultural values and the sensitivity of those values to disturbance. Management zones are shown in Figure 6.1 and policies for each management zone are outlined in Table 6.2. Summaries for each nature reserve are in Part 2. LARGE DAM AT MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) Environment.act.gov.au | 85.
TABLE 6.1 Management zones in Canberra Nature Park Zone 1: Core conservation Zone 2: Conservation and landscape (general protection) Areas with sensitive values most likely to be impacted by physical disturbance. These may include: Areas where the conservation values are less sensitive to disturbance and less likely to be impacted. » high biodiversity and landscape values » nationally threatened ecosystems » important habitat for threatened species » high density of threatened species » high number and/or diversity of rare and uncommon species » locations where woodland bird species are breeding and sensitive to disturbance » places and objects on the ACT Heritage Register » Aboriginal places and objects of heritage significance » significant geological sites » regenerating areas » areas relatively undisturbed for an extended period. Zone 2 areas have biodiversity, geodiversity and landscape values that complement Zone 1, but may have a history of greater modification or disturbance by urban infrastructure, generally have lower species diversity, and do not contain large areas of sensitive threatened species habitat. Zone 1 includes areas identified in the ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004) and the ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans (ACT Government 2017). As an example of how zones have been assigned, Red Hill Nature Reserve has large areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Where the woodland has a diverse and sensitive understorey, it has been categorised as Zone 1. In areas where the understorey is less diverse and less sensitive to disturbance, it has been categorised as Zone 2. Management of Zone 2 areas will seek to improve their condition over time, in line with the objectives for management of native ecosystems (see section 2.6). If the condition of values in an area improves during the life of this plan (for example, following restoration or rehabilitation work) or if an area becomes less resilient, the area may be rezoned through a minor amendment to the management plan under s.187 of the Nature Conservation Act. Note that values such as threatened species occur throughout Canberra Nature Park and have specific protection and management measures associated with them, irrespective of the management zone. 86 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
FIGURE 6.1 Canberra Nature Park Zoning Environment.act.gov.au | 87.
6.2 Policies for the location of infrastructure in defined management zones The intention of the policies in Table 6.2 is to locate damaging activities, such as infrastructure, away from sensitive environments. Infrastructure has been categorised according to potential impacts: ** Must demonstrate that it is not possible to locate the infrastructure outside a reserve or outside a Zone 1 area. * May be constructed in Zone 1 or Zone 2. New infrastructure: All new infrastructure must demonstrate that all reasonable development options and design solutions have been considered and there are no realistic alternatives to the proposed development and that any impacts on reserve values can be avoided, or at least minimised and mitigated. New infrastructure must demonstrate that all options have been investigated to locate the infrastructure on previously disturbed areas. New infrastructure is subject to ACT Government environmental assessment, except for Designated Areas where approval is the responsibility of the National Capital Authority. If significant impacts are expected on matters of national environmental significance under the EPBC Act, a referral to the Commonwealth will be required. Existing infrastructure: May be upgraded to improved standards, or maintained in accordance with an approved code of practice, but must minimise impacts on reserve values and utilise lowest impact construction methods. TABLE 6.2 Policies for the construction and location of infrastructure in defined management zones Infrastructure Zone 1: Core conservation Zone 2: Conservation and landscape (general protection) Management buildings/ structures** for example visitor centre, parks depot, fire shed Not preferred New: May be developed, but only when directly associated with specific ecological restoration, research or education. Co-locate with existing facilities where possible. Campground** Not preferred New: Only if identified in a recreation and tourism strategy.# Recreation hub** for example, car park, toilet, picnic area Not preferred New: Only if identified in a recreation and tourism strategy.# Co-locate with existing facilities. Utility infrastructure** for example, power line, telecommunication tower, water tank, underground cabling Not preferred New: Co-locate with existing services where possible. 88 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Infrastructure Zone 1: Core conservation Zone 2: Conservation and landscape (general protection) Sealed cycle paths** (shared use) Not preferred New: Co-locate with existing services where possible. Management trails** Not preferred Existing: May be redesigned and constructed to improved standards utilising lowest impact methods. New: Only if identified as essential for management purposes. Existing: May be redesigned and constructed to improved standards utilising lowest impact methods. Recreation facilities* for example, boardwalks, viewing platforms Not preferred New: May be developed if identified in a recreation and tourism strategy.# Locate on previously disturbed areas, or co-locate with existing recreation facilities. New: May be developed if identified in a recreation and tourism strategy.# Locate on previously disturbed areas, or co‑locate with existing recreation facilities. Multi-use tracks* (unsealed) Not preferred New: Only if associated with special features. Locate on previously disturbed areas. Existing: May be redesigned and constructed to improved standards utilising lowest impact methods. New: Locate on previously disturbed areas where possible. Existing: May be redesigned and constructed to improved standards utilising lowest impact methods. Walking tracks* New: Only locate on previously disturbed areas. Existing: Priority for track rationalisation, for example, closing informal tracks. New: Locate on previously disturbed areas where possible. Existing: May be redesigned and constructed to improved standards using lowest impact method. Maintenance of utility infrastructure In accordance with an agreed code of practice. Routine access may be permitted if specified in a Management Agreement prepared under the Nature Conservation Act. Management approval is generally required for access. In accordance with an agreed code of practice. Routine access may be permitted if specified in a Management Agreement prepared under the Nature Conservation Act. Management approval is generally required for access. # The Parks and Conservation Service is currently preparing a recreation and tourism strategy. Environment.act.gov.au | 89.
6.3 Access restrictions 6.3.1 Resource Protection Area and Closed Reserve Declaration Under the Nature Conservation Act a reserve (or part of a reserve) may be declared a ‘resource protection area’, which allows activities to be restricted or prohibited on a temporary or permanent basis; for example, to allow a degraded environment to recover. A resource protection area declaration may only need to be in place until the restoration objective is achieved and is subject to periodic review. It is a Disallowable Instrument and must be reviewed at least once every three years. Under the Act a reserve may also be closed by a ‘closed reserve declaration’; for example, to protect sensitive bird- breeding habitat from disturbance, or during extreme weather or management activities. The declaration may apply seasonally or over longer periods. The Parks and Conservation Service will erect signs (and use other communication methods) to inform visitors if access to an area is restricted by a resource protection area or a closed reserve declaration. 6.3.2 ACT Parks and Conservation Service advisory signs There are areas within Canberra Nature Park where access is influenced by the impact of previous activities; for example, areas where unexploded ordnance has been found or sites contaminated by former rubbish tips. The Parks and Conservation Service will provide advice on access restrictions for these areas as required. The nature reserve maps in Part 2 show existing restricted access areas. Other areas may be identified in the future. Access to utility or other infrastructure, for example water reservoirs and telecommunication towers, is also restricted but not shown on maps. 6.3.3 Rural leases Access to rural lease areas within Canberra Nature Park is only permitted with the permission of the lessee. Access may also be prohibited under a closed reserve declaration. Some nature reserve areas are largely surrounded by rural leases and access is only permitted across adjoining unleased Territory land or with the permission of the adjoining lessee. 90 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
MANAGEMENT TRAIL BLACK MOUNTAIN NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) ADVISORY SIGNS ON GATE AT MOUNT MAJURA NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) Environment.act.gov.au | 91.
CHAPTER 7 CONNECTING PEOPLE WITH NATURE: » Extraordinary opportunities for nature- based recreation. » Walking and running permitted everywhere – staying on tracks and trails encouraged. » Cycling and mountain bike riding – only on management trails and multi-use tracks. » Horse riding – only on designated equestrian trails. » Dog walking – only in some reserves, must be on leash and on a track or trail. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Recreational and tourism activities are compatible with protecting reserve values. » Visitor experience is enriched through enhanced understanding of reserve values. » An active healthy lifestyle is promoted through experiencing nature. DOG WALKING IN URAMBI HILLS NATURE RESERVE (BRIAN PRINCE).
7. Nature-based experiences (recreation, health and tourism) 7.1 Welcoming visitors and managing impacts 3 As noted in section 1.8 the management objectives for nature reserves under the Planning and Development Act 2007 are: 1. to conserve the natural environment, and 2. to provide for public use of the area for recreation, education and research. In the event of an inconsistency between the application of these objectives, the second is subject to the first. The ACT Government encourages and welcomes visitors to Canberra Nature Park to appreciate and take pleasure in nature and, at the same time, aims to raise awareness of the natural and cultural values of the reserves and the importance of conserving them.3 The government also promotes recreational activities in nature reserves as part of an active lifestyle and as a way of maintaining physical and social health. Canberra Nature Park provides opportunities for active recreation aligned with the ACT Government Healthy Living initiative and programs such as Find Fitness Outdoors. The EPSDD supports the Healthy Parks Healthy People approach, which has four key principles: » The well-being of all societies depends on healthy ecosystems. » Parks nurture healthy ecosystems. » Contact with nature is essential for improving emotional, physical, and spiritual health and well-being. » Parks are fundamental to economic growth and to vibrant and healthy communities. Canberra Nature Park contributes to all 12 domains, or areas affecting our quality of life, as described in the ACT Wellbeing Framework (ACT Government 2020). COOLEMAN RIDGE NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY) Environment.act.gov.au | 93.
The challenge for the Parks and Conservation Service is to welcome and support visitors in Canberra Nature Park, and at the same time to minimise and manage environmental impacts that may result from recreational activities. These impacts include wildlife disturbance; damage to vegetation or tracks; soil erosion and compaction; exposure of roots, rocks and bedrock; changes in species composition; the spread of weeds and plant pathogens; and the illegal disposal of waste, including dog faeces. With an increasing population and the development of new suburbs in Canberra, the recreational pressure on Canberra Nature Park will continue to increase over coming years. In meeting this challenge, management approaches outlined in this plan include: » limiting disturbance in areas that are of high value and/or sensitive to impact » restricting horse and mountain bike riding to identified tracks » restricting dog walking (on leash) to tracks and trails in identified reserves, and maintaining all other areas as ‘dogs prohibited’ » considering the needs of key recreational activities and promoting good visitor behaviour » limiting access when impacts are more likely to occur, such as not allowing large group events when tracks are wet and avoiding disturbance when birds are nesting » implementing the Parks and Conservation Service landscape classification system to assess sites and provide a range of visitor opportunities and experiences » undertaking a review of tracks and trails within Canberra Nature Park, using the assessment criteria outlined in Trails ACT Planning and Management Guidelines 2015–2025 (ACT Government 2015b) » directing inappropriate and high impact recreational activities outside Canberra Nature Park, recognising that it is only one of a diverse range of outdoor recreation areas in the ACT. The Parks and Conservation Service will continue to promote appropriate use of Canberra Nature Park by providing information on the EPSDD website, including: maps; permissible, restricted and prohibited activities; and details about the plants and animals, geological features and cultural heritage found in reserves. The Parks and Conservation Service will continue regular liaison with recreational groups that use Canberra Nature Park and seek their input on management decisions relating to recreational activities and facilities. The Parks and Conservation Service is developing a recreation and tourism strategy to provide direction and priorities for visitor facilities and recreation management throughout the ACT reserve system. 7.2 Tourism The ACT tourism agency, Visit Canberra, developed the 2020 Tourism Strategy (Domestic Marketing Strategy) to inform and support ongoing marketing programs to increase the value of tourism to the ACT economy. Canberra’s natural areas are important to the ‘Outdoors and Adventure’ key experience pillar identified in the Strategy and the Parks and Conservation Service liaises with the ACT tourism industry on nature-based tourism in the conservation estate. The Canberra Centenary Trail is a key facility for tourism promotion and a popular facility for events. With its diverse ecosystems, ease of access and proximity to accommodation and other services, together with Canberra’s image as the city in the landscape, Canberra Nature Park may have opportunities to further develop nature-based tourism; for example, by increased marketing of its values, by providing activities such as guided walks by Parks and Conservation Service staff, contractors or third party providers, or by helping self-guided tours that utilise a range of interpretive tools, including new technologies. 94 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Proposals for development of any ecotourism activities in Canberra Nature Park must be considered in the context of a strategic approach to ecotourism across the ACT’s parks and reserves. There has, for example, been considerable investment in Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve and Namadgi National Park, which already have a profile for providing nature-based tourism experiences, including the capacity for overnight accommodation. The potential for future nature-based tourism development in Canberra Nature Park will be considered in the context of the development of visitor experience and tourism strategies for the ACT’s parks and reserves, and will prioritise protection of conservation values. 7.3 Reserve facilities Canberra Nature Park contains outstanding natural features, including varied topography offering panoramic views over the city and surrounding areas, threatened ecosystems and species, and significant cultural heritage sites. Information on the values of the reserves is provided on the Parks and Conservation Service website, in brochures, and on reserve signage (see section 8.1 for further information). Visitors are encouraged to understand and enjoy all that Canberra Nature Park has to offer through the provision of infrastructure and facilities that support nature-based experiences and greater understanding of reserve values. There is an extensive network of tracks and trails, providing access for recreational activities and for management purposes such as fire management. The Parks and Conservation Service will continue to review the suitability of park facilities to meet the need of a growing population and will endeavour to ensure that contemporary facilities are provided in locations that are the most important to visitor experiences and minimise adverse impacts on reserve values. CENTENARY TRAIL (PCS LIBRARY) Environment.act.gov.au | 95.
7.3.1 Tracks and trails A key resource for visitor access to Canberra Nature Park is the network of management trails and walking/multi- use tracks in many reserves. Tracks and trails also provide access for fire management activities and emergency response. Maps are available at www.environment.act.gov.au/parks-conservation/parks-and-reserves/explore/ canberra_nature_park. Tracks and trails do not include sealed roads on which the general public may drive motor vehicles, such as those to the summit of Black Mountain, Mount Ainslie, Mount Pleasant and Red Hill, which are maintained by Transport Canberra and City Services. The following definitions for tracks and trails are used in this plan. Management trails are vehicle trails that have generally been designed and constructed to meet the required standards for their purpose. They are used by the Parks and Conservation Service and the ACT Rural Fire Service for park management activities. These trails are also used by utilities or other service providers for the construction, repair or maintenance of infrastructure, and contractors undertaking land management activities. Management trails are also commonly used for cycling and other recreational access/activities. Motor vehicles driven by the public are not generally permitted on these trails, but short-term access may be approved by the Parks and Conservation Service by a licence or permit. Management trails are maintained by the Parks and Conservation Service and/or utilities. Trail surfaces may be sealed, unsealed or graded. A majority of the trails meet the standards for access by light unit, tanker, rigid float and articulated float outlined in the Bushfire Management Standards prepared under the ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plan https://esa.act.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-06/Fire-Managment-Standards-ACT- SBMPv31.pdf. Slashed management trails are unhardened trails created by slashing vegetation to provide essential management access. Walking tracks have generally been designed and constructed for their purpose and are maintained by the Parks and Conservation Service, sometimes with support from ParkCare volunteers. New walking tracks will meet Class 3 of Australian Standard AS 2156.1–2001 Walking Tracks: Classification and Signage. A track management plan is required for all tracks in Canberra Nature Park and should include a classification scheme for all existing walking tracks in line with the Australian Standard. Walking tracks are designed for pedestrian traffic only; uses other than walking or running can degrade tracks and result in conflict between users. Multi-use tracks (unsealed) have been designed and constructed for walking, cycling and mountain biking. These tracks are maintained by the Parks and Conservation Service, sometimes with support from ParkCare volunteers or recreational user groups. The tracks generally meet the Class 3 walking track standard and follow best practice for mountain bike tracks for attributes such as slope, alignment and drainage. Multi-use tracks in Canberra Nature Park currently include sections of the Canberra Centenary Trail and tracks in Bruce Ridge Nature Reserve. Sealed cycle paths (shared use) are designed and constructed to active travel standards and maintained by Transport Canberra and City Services. 96 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Equestrian trails are generally management trails and are also used by others. Equestrian trails may also be overlain by other trail types, such as management trails or multi-use tracks. Equestrian trails are identified in reserve Activities Declarations (see Glossary). Informal tracks have been created by repeated recreational use. These tracks do not meet professional track specifications and may cause environmental impact such as erosion or impact on threatened species. Trails ACT Planning and Management Guidelines 2015–2025 identifies the need to undertake a review of tracks and trails across the ACT, and includes assessment criteria to guide decisions on whether an existing track should be closed, upgraded or maintained or, if appropriate, a new track created. The assessment criteria include consideration of: potential impacts on sensitive environmental and cultural sites; recreational value, including links as part of a track network; maintenance issues; and access for emergency services. The criteria will be used to review tracks in Canberra Nature Park, including closing informal tracks. Priority will be given to the most heavily used reserves. The review will include community consultation. 7.4 Nature-based activities Canberra Nature Park provides Canberra residents and visitors with an extraordinary opportunity for nature-based experiences close to residential areas. In addition to providing a venue for social activities such as picnics or other social gatherings, the park’s reserves are commonly used for active pursuits such as running or walking, cycling, mountain biking, dog walking, horse riding, orienteering, rogaining and geocaching. Bird or animal watching is a motive for many visitors, wildflower appreciation for others, while some just enjoy the opportunity to sit and relax in a natural environment setting (MARS 2016). 7.4.1 Walking and running Walking and running are permitted and are the most popular recreational activities in Canberra Nature Park, together accounting for around half of all visits. Walking and running are permitted in all reserves and on all management trails, multi-use tracks and walking tracks in the reserves. While walking or running off-track is not prohibited, repetitive pedestrian traffic over the same areas can result in trampling of vegetation and the development of informal tracks, leading to changes in hydrology, erosion and other adverse impacts. Walking off track also increases the risk of the introduction of weed species or accidental transport of pathogens. Walkers and runners are therefore encouraged to stay on existing tracks and follow best practice as outlined in Box 1. BOX 1 Walking—best practice » Stay on walking, multi-use or management tracks. » Do not take short cuts or create new tracks. » Do not shift rocks or fallen branches to mark informal tracks. » Avoid disturbing plants and animals. » Ensure your footwear is clean and free of seeds. Environment.act.gov.au | 97.
7.4.2 Orienteering and rogaining Orienteering involves participants navigating their way around course of designated checkpoints (called ‘controls’) using a map and compass. A key element of orienteering course planning is to present participants with route choices, some faster but more physically or navigationally challenging than others. Sensitive areas are avoided during course planning and by marking particular areas on the map as ‘out of bounds’. Orienteering ACT organises many events within Canberra Nature Park, and orienteers also train individually within the reserves. While competition events are usually on foot, sometimes mountain bikes are used. Areas within Canberra Nature Park have been important for the development of orienteering in the ACT since the sport was established in 1971 and have become even more important since the loss of some pine forests in the 2003 bushfire reduced the number of suitable forested areas outside reserves. Recent bushfires have also reduced the accessibility of Namadgi National Park and parts of Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve. Rogaining is the sport of long distance cross-country navigation. Rogaines are generally day and night events in which teams of two to five members travel entirely on foot for between three and 24 hours, navigating by map and compass to controls with different point values within the allotted time limit. The ACT Rogaining Association advises that Canberra Nature Park is typically used one to three times per year, mainly for shorter events. Like other group events, a permit from the Parks and Conservation Service is required for the holding of an orienteering or rogaining event in Canberra Nature Park (see Section 7.5). Organisers of and participants in orienteering and rogaining events should follow best practice as outlined in Box 2. ORIENTEERING IN MOUNT TAYLOR NATURE RESERVE (TOM DE JONGH, ORIENTEERING ACT) 98 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
7.4.3 Dog walking Dog walking is a popular activity in Canberra Nature Park. Limiting access for dogs to some areas of Canberra Nature Park is important in order to protect sensitive environmental areas and species as dogs can have a significant impact on reserve values. For example, dogs may: » harass, chase, maim, kill and/or orphan wildlife (both diurnal and nocturnal wildlife) » disturb wildlife feeding or breeding patterns through their scent, presence and defecation/urination » introduce diseases, such as distemper virus, parvovirus or Murray Valley Encephalitis virus, and transport parasites, such as hydatids, into wildlife habitats » conflict with other reserve visitors. Dogs are prohibited in reserves unless an Activities Declaration (see Glossary) under the Nature Conservation Act indicates that dogs are permitted in the reserve subject to certain conditions, such as a requirement that the dog must be on a leash and on a formal track or trail. Penalties apply for breaches of these conditions. Dog access is also subject to Domestic Animals Act 2000 declarations, and dogs off leash or harassing wildlife can be impounded or destroyed under the Act. The Domestic Animals Act requires: » dogs in public places to be on a leash and under the control of the carer » the carer of a dog in a public place to carry equipment suitable for the hygienic disposal of faeces dropped by the dog » the carer of a dog in a public place to hygienically dispose of any faeces dropped by the dog. Dogs are permitted in 23 of the 39 Canberra Nature Park reserves (see Table 7.1) and must be on leash, on a formal track or trail, and under control at all times. The ACT Government’s Canberra Dog Model (ACT Government 2019d) recommends a leash length no longer than two metres https://www.cityservices.act.gov.au/pets-and-wildlife/ domestic-animals/dogs/recreation-with-my-dog/the-canberra-dog-model. BOX 2 Orienteering and rogaining—best practice Participants » Avoid disturbing animals, plants and rocks. » Be considerate of all reserve users. » Follow all guidelines for carparking, assembly areas and out of bounds areas. » Ensure footwear is clean and free of seeds. » Remove all waste (organisers to ensure areas are left clean after an event). Event organisers » Consult Parks and Conservation Service in advance of planning events (permits are required). » Avoid Zone 1 Core Conservation area when planning large events (see section 7.5—Booked group events). » Ensure vegetation is not cleared or damaged to improve the visibility of markers. » Clearly mark sensitive areas and other ‘out of bounds’ zones on maps. » Minimise likely routes through high use areas of Canberra Nature Park. » In areas of sensitive vegetation, plan routes on formed tracks. » If bicycles are used, routes must be restricted to tracks and trails where cycling is permitted. Environment.act.gov.au | 99.
Allowing dogs into these nature reserves is a continuation of past practice and acknowledges the significant value many people in neighbouring suburbs place on the activity. If the presence of dogs is found to be having an unacceptable adverse impact on reserve values, the approval for dog walking in some locations will be reviewed. Visitors with dogs should follow best practice as outlined in Box 3. Callum Brae and Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo nature reserves, and the mid- to lower slopes on the eastern side of Mount Ainslie are important breeding habitat for threatened woodland birds. Dogs are prohibited in these reserves, with the exception of Mount Ainslie. Reserve users walking dogs should avoid the eastern areas of Mt Ainslie during the bird breeding season. These areas may be closed during this period. When considering access for dogs in new Canberra Nature Park reserves, the Parks and Conservation Service takes account of: » likely disturbance to rare or threatened species » possible impacts on other species (such as nesting birds), mobility of kangaroos near roads and access to dams » potential conflict with other reserve users. Access restrictions do not apply to assistance animals or dogs otherwise exempted under the Domestic Animals Act. The Conservator may issue a Nature Conservation Licence for specialist dog trainers, for example, the Australian Customs Service and Australian Federal Police. BOX 3 Dog walking—best practice » Always keep your dog on leash, preferably no longer than two metres, and only on a formal track or trail. » Ensure that you are able to physically restrain the dog on the leash. » You must stay on a track or trail to reduce the area influenced by the dog’s smell and behaviour. » Avoid disturbing kangaroos and other wildlife. » Keep dogs out of dams and waterways. » Do not lead your dog when riding a horse or bicycle. » Ensure your dog does not harass or conflict with other visitors. » Remove dog droppings. DOG WALKING AT MOUNT TAYLOR NATURE RESERVE (LOIS PADGHAM-FLOYD) 100 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
7.4.4 Horse riding The ACT has an extensive network of equestrian trails, including sections of the Bicentennial National Trail that extends from Cooktown in Queensland to Healesville in Victoria. Many ACT Government horse holding paddocks are adjacent to Canberra Nature Park reserves and equestrian trails are generally located in close proximity to these paddocks to facilitate accessible and pleasant riding experiences. It is an offence under the Nature Conservation Act for a person to take a horse into a reserve, unless there is an Activities Declaration (see Glossary) in place which declares horse riding to be a restricted activity, and the person is complying with the directions and requirements stated in the declaration. Activities Declarations that permit horse riding on identified trails are in place for several Canberra Nature Park Reserves, listed in Table 7.1. Restricting horse riding to identified trails helps to limit environmental impacts, which can include damage to vegetation, soil compaction and erosion, introduction of weed species, and accidental transport of pathogens. This restriction also helps minimise conflicts with other users and reduces risks to the riders and their animals. Horse riders in Canberra Nature Park should follow best practice as outlined in Box 4. HORSE RIDING ON THE BICENTENNIAL NATIONAL TRAIL, MCQUOIDS HILL NATURE RESERVE (ALEXANDRA WETZEL) Environment.act.gov.au | 101.
BOX 4 Horse riding—best practice » Stay on identified equestrian trails. » Do not take short cuts or make new tracks; they damage plants and wildlife habitat. » Avoid riding during or immediately after wet weather conditions. » Avoid spreading weeds by ensuring that horses have access to clean feed. » Ensure horses are under control at all times. » Do not allow horses to graze on vegetation while within Canberra Nature Park. » Do not allow horses into dams or watercourses. » Be considerate of other reserve users and avoid conflict with other visitors, such as people walking dogs or riding bicycles. HORSE RIDING, MOUNT AINSLIE NATURE RESERVE (DR LIZ REDMOND) Other horse riding areas outside the ACT reserve system include Stromlo Forest Park, Majura Pines, Isaacs Pines, the National Arboretum and sections of the Bicentennial Trail. While balancing the needs of recreational horse riders with those of other users and the conservation of natural and cultural values, the Parks and Conservation Service will trial the provision of additional horse riding access on defined trails in a small number of Canberra Nature Park reserves. 102 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Proposals for new equestrian trails in Canberra Nature Park will consider such factors as: » reserve zoning » avoiding areas that have important values: for example, sensitive wildlife habitat, or threatened, rare or uncommon species » physical constraints such as grade, slope-alignment angle, soil type and soil moisture, type of tread construction, surfacing and drainage » trail design—which should focus on side-hill trail alignments with limited grades and frequent grade reversals to minimise soil erosion, muddiness and tread widening » connections with the existing horse trail network » avoiding conflict with other reserve users » horse and rider safety. 7.4.5 Cycling and mountain biking (including e-bikes) Cycling and mountain biking are popular activities in many Canberra Nature Park reserves for both commuting and recreation. In the ACT, the definition of bicycle includes power-assisted pedal cycles (also known as e-bikes or pedalecs) with a power output not exceeding 250 watts (see Glossary for full definition). Canberra Nature Park has an extensive network of management trails and multi-use tracks where cycling is permitted. Cycling and mountain biking are not permitted on walking tracks. Restricting cycling to management trails and multi-use tracks helps to limit environmental impacts, which can include damage to vegetation, soil compaction and erosion, introduction of weed species, and accidental transport of pathogens. This restriction also helps minimise conflicts with other users and reduces risks to the riders. Canberra Nature Park features two key mountain bike initiatives. Canberra Centenary Trail circuits the ACT, covering approximately 140 kilometres. Some sections of the trail, on Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura and Black Mountain for example, are for walkers only. These sections have duplicate routes that cater for cyclists. At Bruce Ridge Nature Reserve, the Parks and Conservation Service and Friends of Bruce Ridge have worked together on the network of mountain bike tracks that have been designed, or realigned, to limit ecological impact and improve safety for other users. Table 7.1 identifies Canberra Nature Park reserves where cycling and mountain biking are permitted. Riders within Canberra Nature Park should follow best practice as outlined in Box 5. BOX 5 Cycling and mountain biking—best practice » Ride on management trails or mountain bike/multi use tracks only. » Do not go off-track, take short cuts, form new tracks, build jumps or other structures. » Respect the rights of others, for example walkers and horse riders. Slow down and give them right of way. » Leave animals, plants and rocks where you find them. » Do not ride in large groups. » Avoid riding in wet, muddy conditions. » Keep bikes clean to prevent the spread of weeds and plant diseases. » Avoid skidding as it breaks the soil surface and leads to erosion. Environment.act.gov.au | 103.
Other mountain biking areas outside the ACT reserve system include Stromlo Forest Park, Majura Pines, Isaacs Pines, Sparrow Hill, Kowen Pines, Tuggeranong Pines, Fadden Pines and Yerrabi Ponds. The development of mountain bike areas such as that in Majura Pines, which is next to a nature reserve, must consider likely flow-on effects for the adjacent reserve. These may include an increase in the number of mountain bike riders using the reserve. The creation of informal tracks is to be prevented. Development of new multi-use tracks within Canberra Nature Park must consider: » reserve zoning » avoiding any areas that have important values, for example sensitive wildlife habitat, or threatened, rare or uncommon species » physical constraints such as grade, slope-alignment angle, soil type and soil moisture, type of tread construction, surfacing and drainage » track design—which should focus on side-hill track alignments with limited grades and frequent grade reversals to minimise soil erosion, muddiness and tread widening » connections with the existing mountain bike track network » avoiding conflict with other reserve users » rider safety. CYCLING ON A MANAGEMENT TRAIL, MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY) CYCLING ON A MULTI-USE TRACK, BRUCE RIDGE NATURE RESERVE (ANDREW TATNELL) 104 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
TABLE 7.1 Reserves where dogs, horses and cycling are permitted/prohibited Nature Reserve Dogs* Horses* Cycling* Aranda Bushland (No dogs in Aranda Snow Gums) Black Mountain Bruce Ridge Budjan Galindji Grasslands Callum Brae Cooleman Ridge Crace Grasslands# Dunlop Grasslands Farrer Ridge Goorooyarroo Gossan Hill Gungaderra Grasslands Isaacs Ridge Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands# Jerrabomberra West Grasslands Justice Robert Hope Park Kinlyside# Kowen Escarpment# Melrose McQuoids Hill Molonglo Gorge Mount Ainslie Mount Majura Mount Mugga Mugga Mount Painter Mount Pleasant Mount Taylor Mulanggari Grasslands Mulligans Flat (Equestrian trail in Little Mulligans) Nadjung Mada** Oakey Hill O’Connor Ridge Percival Hill Red Hill Rob Roy# The Pinnacle Tuggeranong Hill# Urambi Hills# Wanniassa Hills * Dogs must be on leash and on a track or trail. Horse riding and cycling are only permitted on identified trails. ** Cycling permitted only on Old Well Station Road. # No access to rural lease areas without permission from the rural lessee. Environment.act.gov.au | 105.
7.4.6 Geocaching Geocaching is an outdoor activity in which participants use a global positioning system (GPS) receiver to find the location of a cache. Geocaching is only permitted in Canberra Nature Park nature reserves where it does not involve digging holes and burying objects, depositing objects within cultural heritage sites or littering. Virtual geocaching is preferred. The placement of a physical cache in Canberra Nature Park requires the permission of the reserve manager. Sensitive areas, such as Zone 1 areas, should be avoided. Best practice approaches are outlined in Box 6. BOX 6 Geocaching—best practice » Use virtual geocaching in preference to a placing a physical cache. » Seek permission of the reserve manager prior to placing a physical cache in Canberra Nature Park. » Do not locate caches off-track in Zone 1 areas, in dams, water courses, or cultural heritage sites. » Do not move rocks or fallen branches. » Do not dig holes or bury objects. » Do not create informal tracks or damage vegetation. 7.4.7 Fishing and yabbying Fishing is not permitted within Canberra Nature Park, except in the Molonglo River Gorge Nature Reserve, which is declared as trout waters under the Fisheries Act 2000. Seasonal closures and size limits apply. Only artificial fly and lure fishing is permitted in trout waters. Yabbying and collection of fishing bait is not permitted within Canberra Nature Park. 7.4.8 Rock climbing, abseiling and bouldering There are very few, if any, areas with potential for climbing or abseiling in Canberra Nature Park, with the exception of Mt Ainslie quarry, where these activities are not permitted. Bouldering is permitted in Canberra Nature Park other than in Black Mountain Nature Reserve, where it is not permitted. Reserve visitors participating in bouldering activities in Canberra Nature Park should follow best practice outlined in Box 7 and take particular care to avoid impacts on values in Zone 1 areas. Insertion of bolts or other fixtures is not permitted. BOX 7 Bouldering—best practice » Do not create informal tracks or damage vegetation. » Do not move rocks or fallen branches. » Do not disturb plants and animals. » Keep group sizes small. » Be considerate of other users. » Take care of vegetation when placing mats for protection. » Brush any chalk off the rock with a soft bristled brush when you are finished. » Carry out all waste. » Respect regulations and closures. 106 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
7.4.9 Metal detecting/fossicking The use of metal detectors for fossicking has the potential to adversely impact the natural or cultural values of Canberra Nature Park through, for example, damaging native plants, removing soil or stone or damaging a site or object of archaeological interest, and may result in offences under several ACT laws, including the Public Unleased Land Act 2013, the Nature Conservation Act 2014 and the Heritage Act 2004. In addition, many of the reserves in Canberra Nature Park contain threatened species research and monitoring sites, which are marked with metal tags that lie just below the surface. These tags are a vital component of the research and would be at high risk of disturbance from fossicking activities. The use of metal detectors in Canberra Nature Park will be permitted only with the approval of the reserve manager and will be restricted to special circumstances such as short-term searching for lost personal property. The use of metal detectors for general fossicking is not permitted. 7.4.10 Archery Archery is not permitted in Canberra Nature Park. Under the Nature Conservation Act 2014, it is an offence for a person to possess or use a bow or arrow in a reserve. 7.4.11 Non-powered and powered flight Non-powered flight Hang gliding and paragliding are not common activities within Canberra Nature Park as there are few suitable areas close to public roads. Hang gliding and paragliding are forms of aviation and subject to Civil Aviation Safety Authority regulations. The Parks and Conservation Service has granted an agreement to the ACT Hang Gliding and Paragliding Association to use a launching site within Rob Roy Nature Reserve. Access to other reserves is subject to management permission. Issues considered in providing a permit or licence include: » the activity must be conducted in accordance with Civil Aviation Safety Authority regulations » participants must be members of a club that is affiliated with the Hang Gliding Federation of Australia, which provides public liability insurance » a launching site is to be located only on a previously disturbed area » wash down of vehicles is required prior to entry to avoid spreading weeds » no access on days of total fire ban. Hot air balloons are regularly flown in the skies above Canberra Nature Park. Landing hot air balloons within a nature reserve is not permitted except under a nature conservation licence and with permission from the Civil Aviation Safety Authority, or in an emergency. Powered flight (low altitude) Motorised aircraft, such as helicopters, and personal aircraft, such as ultralights and motorised paragliders, are not permitted to land or take off in Canberra Nature Park, except in an emergency. Environment.act.gov.au | 107.
7.4.12 Drones Drones—also known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) or remotely piloted aircraft (RPA)—are considered by the Civil Aviation Safety Authority to be aircraft, with their use governed by Commonwealth aviation law. States and territories are able to impose restrictions on drone use consistent with Commonwealth law. While the Parks and Conservation Service recognises that drones can be useful for search and rescue, event photography, management activities and scientific research, their recreational use can adversely affect wildlife and impact on the privacy and enjoyment of visitors. The lithium polymer batteries used in drones can cause small but intense fires on impact. Drones can also represent a serious risk to park operations such as fire management. In consideration of these risks, flying of drones, including taking off and landing, is a prohibited activity within Canberra Nature Park. Operation of drones may be approved for some purposes, such as conservation research, through a licence granted under the provisions of the Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Chapter 11). Where a licence is granted, conditions will apply to ensure that the activity is consistent with the management objectives for the reserve, and that there are no adverse impacts on visitors or reserve values. 7.4.13 Model aircraft Two model aircraft clubs are currently authorised to fly model aircraft in identified areas within two Canberra Nature Park reserves—Crace Grasslands and Jerrabomberra West Grasslands nature reserves. 7.5 Booked group events Some Canberra Nature Park reserves are frequently used for group events such as orienteering, rogaining, athletics (running) and mountain biking. The most heavily used reserves are Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura, Black Mountain and Bruce Ridge. Permits for events are required under the Public Unleased Land Act 2013 and restrictions may be applied to protect reserve values. For events involving 100 or more participants, or requiring complex arrangements, event planning should be in consultation with the Parks and Conservation Service and other government agencies such as ACT Roads and be well in advance of the event. Fees are charged for some types of events and activities. Events will only be approved if there is an identifiable, accountable and appropriately insured organiser (whether an individual, group or association). Organisers must provide the ACT Government with an identified area of operation and a defined timeframe for the event. Once approved, organisers must ensure all events are run in accordance with any approval conditions. Event organisers are strongly encouraged to consider possible impacts on nature reserve values when planning an event, in particular to avoid impacts on areas with high and/or sensitive natural or cultural values (Zone 1: Core Conservation). Organisers are also requested to consider alternative locations when seeking an event permit, as the preferred site may not be approved. When the Parks and Conservation Service assesses a permit application, it considers: » restrictions on some activities in Zone 1: Core Conservation areas » seasonal conditions, for example wildlife breeding period, species in flower or setting seed, total fire ban declared » operational requirements, for example fire fuel reduction activities, weed or feral animal control, or kangaroo management activities 108 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
» weather conditions, for example wet weather or drought, that impact on soil condition and potential erosion of tracks » potential safety issues, for example risk of bushfire and mobility of kangaroos near roads » potential conflicts with other visitors or booked events » the need for event infrastructure, for example toilet facilities, waste disposal, parking, staging areas, and the site’s capability to withstand high intensity use for short periods » ensuring existing tracks are used wherever possible, and no new tracks are created » the need for special arrangements to cater for occasional large national or international events (a detailed event management plan will be required for large events) » any risk management plans required as part of the application. Impacts can be avoided or mitigated by the careful selection of staging areas and the routes of courses, by avoiding sensitive areas or sites, by cancelling or postponing events in adverse conditions, and by providing appropriate facilities. Public notification of major events is important to advise other visitors/users. Monitoring of activities will inform future management decisions by the Parks and Conservation Service. 7.6 Commercial activities Commercial activities are those undertaken by organisations, businesses or individuals where there is a charge for services or products. Group events held by volunteer not-for-profit organisations that charge event fees are not considered to be commercial activities. Access for commercial operators is provided in accordance with the Parks and Conservation Service licencing system (under development). Preparation of an environmental management plan may be required for commercial activities. 7.7 New recreational activities New recreational activities may emerge over the life of this plan, and the Conservator will consider the following issues before allowing or prohibiting the activity through an Activities Declaration: » relevant legislative provisions and government policies » the goals, objectives and policies in this management plan » potential impacts on wildlife and conservation values » potential impacts on cultural heritage values » loss of amenity to other recreational users » options for undertaking the activity elsewhere, outside Canberra Nature Park » public health and safety and the exposure to risk of park management staff or other users. Environment.act.gov.au | 109.
7.8 Monitoring recreational use and visitor satisfaction The ACT Government conducts regular surveys of the community to help determine community and visitor awareness, use and satisfaction with the ACT open space system, including nature reserves. In 2016–2017, 64% of ACT residents had visited Canberra Nature Park in the previous 12 months, with several visits to a reserve being common. High levels of satisfaction (98%) were recorded for the overall management of Canberra Nature Park. The most common reasons for visiting were: walking, jogging, sitting and relaxing, and showing children a bush area. A majority of survey respondents supported cycling and mountain biking. The most visited Canberra Nature Park reserves were Black Mountain, Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura, Red Hill, and Mount Taylor nature reserves. Survey respondents requested more signs and environmental information for some reserves. The permit approval system is used to collect data on booked group events. Limited other data are collected on the amount, types and distribution of informal recreational use of reserves. Trails ACT Planning and Management Guidelines identifies the need to collect user data to better understand visitor use and notes that external data sources can provide useful information. Additional data on informal recreational use of reserves will be collected to give the Parks and Conservation Service a better understanding of the needs of visitors, and whether they can be met, while also protecting and maintaining the conservation values of reserves. 7.9 Visitor safety The Parks and Conservation Service aims to provide a safe and enjoyable experience for visitors to nature reserves. Canberra Nature Park is generally a safe place to visit; however, accidents and incidents can occur in natural settings and park managers cannot take responsibility for visitors’ safety. Risk of serious harm can be avoided if visitors take reasonable care and if reserve management has adequately evaluated and mitigated serious hazards. The duty of park managers is to identify foreseeable risks and to take reasonable steps to avoid or reduce them, particularly for people who may not have the skills, knowledge or experience to recognise the risk or its magnitude. Actions may include signs, closure of particular areas, maintenance or reconstruction work, and visitor education. 7.10 Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment nature reserves Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment nature reserves, located next to the Kowen Forest pine plantation north- east of Queanbeyan, have previously been managed by ACT Forests together with the pine plantation for many years. Both nature reserves are now managed as part of Canberra Nature Park and in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies outlined in this plan. As a result, some recreational and other activities previously approved in Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve are no longer appropriate, including trail bike riding and most 4WD driving. Off-trail use of trail bikes and 4WD vehicles will not be permitted. The use of motorised vehicles on management trails will be reduced and will only be permitted with the approval of the reserve manager. 110 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Consideration will be given to approving motorised vehicle use on management trails within Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve only for limited 4WD driver training or where it is required to provide safe connection between areas of the broader Kowen Forest for an event. Parks and Conservation Service staff will liaise with organisations seeking approval to undertake recreational or other activities no longer permitted and assist where possible in recommending alternative locations. A transition period will be implemented for phasing out these previously permitted activities. 7.11 Prohibited activities The Nature Conservation Act prohibits certain activities within all reserves. Activities declarations may prohibit certain activities in specific reserves or conditionally allow, as restricted activities, some activities otherwise prohibited under the Act. Prohibited activities within Canberra Nature Park include: » killing or taking native animals or plants » yabbying » disturbing or removing rocks or soil » felling, collecting or removing native timber » bringing a non-native animal into a reserve (unless permitted by an activities declaration) » camping » lighting fires » driving motor vehicles or riding motor bikes (other than on public roads or car parks) » entering a closed reserve » vandalism » dumping of waste » littering. Penalties may apply. Under the Nature Conservation Act 2014, it is an offence to possess or use, in a reserve a. a firearm; or b. a spear, spear gun, bow or arrow; or c. a trap, net, snare or other device designed, or capable of being used, to take or capture an animal; or d. a substance that is capable of being used to take or capture an animal. Penalties apply. Environment.act.gov.au | 111.
7.12 Nature-based experiences: management policies, objectives and actions Nature-based experiences (recreation, health and tourism) Policies » Nature-based experiences, including recreation, health and tourism activities, will be encouraged and supported through the provision of contemporary facilities, programs and information. » Low impact activities that are consistent with government initiatives and programs to encourage healthy and active living will be supported where appropriate within Canberra Nature Park. » Bins will not be provided in Canberra Nature Park nature reserves and visitors are required to remove all waste, including dog faeces. » The Parks and Conservation Service will regularly liaise with user groups and seek their input on decisions relating to activities and facilities. » Restrictions on dogs in all nature reserves will continue to apply, including retention of the ‘on leash’ requirement and restricting dogs to formal tracks and trails. » Approval for dog walking in some locations will be reviewed if dogs are found to be having a significant adverse impact on reserve values. » Cycling and mountain biking are not permitted on walking tracks. » Off-trail use of motorised vehicles in Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment is prohibited and their use on trails in the reserves will be reduced. » Consideration will be given to approving motorised vehicle use on management trails within Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve only for limited 4WD driver training or where it is required to provide safe connections between areas of the broader Kowen Forest for an event. Nature-based activities Objectives » The accessibility and amenity of Canberra Nature Park are enhanced and community enjoyment of nature and the benefits it provides are increased. » Residents and visitors have a greater appreciation of the natural and cultural values of Canberra Nature Park and the range of nature-based experiences available. » Newly arrived Canberrans and visitors are welcomed to Canberra Nature Park through enjoyable, culturally appropriate, interactive experiences that encourage regular visits. » Levels and types of visitor use are consistent with the conservation of natural and cultural heritage. » Park managers have a greater understanding of existing types and levels of recreation and visitor use. 112 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Nature-based experiences (recreation, health and tourism) Actions 53. Establish a visitor experience framework for Canberra Nature Park consistent with the Territory wide framework. 54. Support community involvement in nature-based experiences through provision of enhanced facilities and visitor programs, the use of innovative technology, and increased availability of information. 55. Gather spatial and temporal data on visitor use (including through the use of new technology) to better inform management of Canberra Nature Park. 56. Use the Trails ACT Planning and Management Guidelines criteria to review tracks and trails and prepare a track management plan, including closing informal tracks and classifying any new tracks in accordance with Australian standards. 57. Trial the provision of additional horse riding access to defined trails in a small number of reserves. 58. Develop and implement a strategy to reduce the on-trail use of motorised vehicles in Molonglo Gorge and Kowen reserves. 59. Implement measures to mitigate hazards to visitor safety. Nature-based health and well-being Objectives » Nature-based activities in Canberra Nature Park contribute to the improved emotional, physical, and spiritual health and well-being of our community. » Canberra Nature Park is valued for the health and well-being benefits it provides. Actions 60. Support ACT Government initiatives for healthy and active living in Canberra Nature Park reserves (where appropriate). 61. Encourage partnerships and cooperation with relevant organisations to improve and promote the health and community benefits of nature-based activities. 62. Explore partnerships with health providers to increase use of Canberra Nature Park as a venue for healing and well-being. 63. Provide culturally appropriate activities for new Canberrans to experience nature, to feel safe and to develop an understanding of ACT’s natural and cultural values. Nature-based tourism/events Objectives » Tourism activities within Canberra Nature Park are primarily related to an appreciation of its natural and cultural values. » The potential for nature-based tourism activities in Canberra Nature Park is considered in the context of a strategic approach to visitor experience and ecotourism across ACT reserves, and conservation of the natural environment. Actions 64. Promote Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and Jerrabomberra Wetlands (which has a separate management plan) as key destinations for environmental education activities, supported by the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. 65. Implement the ACT 2020 Tourism Strategy (Domestic Marketing Strategy), where applicable, in nature reserves. 66. Explore opportunities for holding appropriate community ‘events’ in Canberra Nature Park. Environment.act.gov.au | 113.
IDENTIFYING NATIVE GRASSES (ANDREW TATNELL) CHAPTER 8 INVOLVING THE COMMUNITY: » ParkCare groups have made important contributions to weed and erosion control, planting and education for over 30 years. » Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo – managed in partnership with Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. » Catchment groups provide a coordinated approach to community projects. » Neighbours assist in protecting reserve values, e.g. by controlling pets and preventing the spread of weeds. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Volunteer groups, partnerships and community organisations are supported. » Traditional Custodians are involved in land management programs, providing meaningful work on Country and economic development opportunities..
8. Community involvement 8.1 Nature’s classroom—providing educational experiences in Canberra Nature Park Reserves play an important role as ‘nature’s classroom’ and can create life-long connections between people and nature by providing multiple ways for people of all ages to learn from and be inspired by nature. Interpretation and environmental education activities help the community, including reserve visitors, to understand and appreciate the values and management objectives for Canberra Nature Park. Many local institutions utilise Canberra Nature Park for environmental education and there is further potential for the Parks and Conservation Service to encourage and facilitate these activities. Successful community engagement fosters stewardship—an aware and engaged community is more likely to become involved in protecting and maintaining reserve values. An important element of community engagement is to provide reserve users with sufficient information to enable them to understand the potential impacts of recreational activities and the reasons for the limitations placed on some activities in some areas. Information about Canberra Nature Park is provided on the Parks and Conservation Service website, in brochures, on signs within some reserves, and on ACT Government ACTMAPi. Methods and media used to increase awareness of reserve values also include smartphone apps, self-guided walks, guided events, newspaper articles, radio and television interviews, and online content. 8.2 Community involvement in management Partnerships are important for making the best use of resources, encouraging innovation, gathering knowledge and helping the Parks and Conservation Service to deliver better outcomes for parks and people. The Parks and Conservation Service engages with an extensive range of community organisations, research and educational institutions, recreational user groups and neighbours who have an interest in Canberra Nature Park. Many make a significant contribution to maintaining and supporting reserve values. Citizen science activities by groups such as Canberra Nature Map, Canberra Ornithologists Group, Frogwatch, Waterwatch and Vegwatch also provide valuable data on Canberra Nature Park values for use by managers and as information for the public. 8.2.1 ParkCare “People wanted to care for these beautiful places, and in caring, wanted to do their bit for the environment in which they lived, and became involved in a labour of love working to restore, nurture and conserve what is so valued about these places.” Wendy Rainbird, Friends of Farrer Ridge, 2016. ParkCare is a partnership between the Parks and Conservation Service and community members with an interest in caring for the natural and cultural environment. ParkCare groups have operated in Canberra Nature Park for over 30 years. Their activities include revegetation, weed control, seed collection, erosion control, vegetation mapping, water quality monitoring, track maintenance, guided and self-guided walks, education programs, biodiversity surveys, and maintenance and restoration of heritage places. Many ParkCare groups have prepared information specific to a particular reserve; for example, Mount Painter vegetation plan and Cooleman Ridge regeneration report. The Friends of Mount Majura and Red Hill Regenerators have extensive websites. Environment.act.gov.au | 115.
ParkCare activities make an important contribution to protecting and improving Canberra Nature Park reserves, with volunteers contributing significant time to conservation work. Work plans are developed for each ParkCare group and approved by the Parks and Conservation Service to ensure all activities align with management objectives for a reserve. The Parks and Conservation Service aims to provide a positive, safe and rewarding volunteer experience and has established a ParkCare Hub at www.environment.act.gov.au/parks-conservation/parks-and-reserves/get- involved/the-ParkCare-initiative. Volunteer activities are subject to the ACT Parks and Conservation Volunteer Code of Conduct and Volunteer Policy. From time to time, ParkCare groups seek ACT or Australian Government funding to undertake projects within a reserve. It is important that, before starting the funding application process, the ParkCare group ensures the project contributes to activities outlined in the ParkCare work plan and is supported by the Parks and Conservation Service. Canberra Nature Park—ParkCare in 2021 (New ParkCare groups may be established) » Cooleman Ridge ParkCare » Farrer Ridge ParkCare » Friends of Aranda Bushland » Friends of Black Mountain » Friends of Bruce Ridge » Friends of Mount Majura » Friends of Mount Painter » Friends of Mount Pleasant » Friends of Mulligans Flat » Friends of the Pinnacle » Friends of Tuggeranong Hill » Isaacs Ridge/Mount Mugga Mugga ParkCare » Mount Ainslie Weeders » Mount Taylor ParkCare » Oakey Hill ParkCare » Red Hill Regenerators » Urambi Hills ParkCare PARKCARE VOLUNTEERS MAPPING A RABBIT WARREN, MOUNT AINSLIE NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY) PARKCARE VOLUNTEERS CONSTRUCTING A TRACK IN MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (PCS LIBRARY) 116 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
EXTENSIVE EFFORT BY PARKCARE VOLUNTEERS HAS REDUCED WEEDS ON RED HILL NATURE RESERVE. TOP: 1974 (CHRIS PAVICH); BOTTOM: 2012 (MICHAEL MULVANEY) Environment.act.gov.au | 117.
8.2.2 The Ngunnawal community Parks and Conservation Service Aboriginal staff operate guided walks and cultural activities for the public and field trips for the local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community (within ACT managed lands), providing insight into the cultural landscape and traditional natural resource management skills. Other activities operated by local Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians are supported and promoted. The Parks and Conservation Service is continuing to improve engagement with Ngunnawal people so they may provide advice on caring for the parks and reserves across the ACT. It is envisaged that a stronger relationship with the Ngunnawal community will facilitate more opportunities for Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and their families to obtain greater access to Country and to have more opportunity to be involved in land management and cultural activities. In addition, as part of a commitment in the ACT Aboriginal Fire Management Framework, the Parks and Conservation Service is running training courses to enable Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to be involved in cultural burning and post-burn monitoring programs. Canberra Nature Park offers opportunities for further land management programs that involve the local Ngunnawal community and provide meaningful work on Country as well as economic development opportunities (see also section 4.3). 8.2.3 The Woodlands and Wetlands Trust The Woodlands and Wetlands Trust (the Trust) was established in 2012 with the goal of ensuring that “Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and Jerrabomberra Wetlands are managed to provide rich and diverse environments for current and future generations”. The Trust is governed by a board of community representatives with expertise in science, public administration, fundraising and outreach. The two reserves are managed in partnership between the community, government and private sector in a way that aims to achieve improved ecosystem restoration and, through educational and eco- tourism opportunities, inspire conservation values within the community of the Canberra region. The Trust raises funds to support conservation activities in Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and Jerrabomberra Wetlands. In Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo nature reserves, the Trust’s focus has been on supporting the Woodlands Sanctuary, where a joint ACT Government–Australian National University research partnership is conducting woodland restoration research inside a predator-proof fence. The research includes the reintroduction of locally extinct species such as the Eastern Bettong and Eastern Quoll. The Woodlands and Wetlands Trust also has a focus on community engagement, promoting nature-based recreation and educational activities in the Sanctuary, including regular guided twilight walking tours that provide visitors with the opportunity to catch a glimpse of bettongs, curlews and other nocturnal animals in their natural habitat. The Trust fosters community participation in numerous ways, including through involving volunteers in tour guiding, provision of management advice, citizen science, historical research and documentation, support of experimental work and monitoring. The Trust’s ecological and outreach work provides a variety of volunteering opportunities for members of the Friends of Mulligans Flat ParkCare group. Additional opportunities will arise with the opening in 2022 of a new Woodland Learning Centre at Throsby as a major focus for environmental education in Canberra. 118 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
8.2.4 Other organisations and groups Other organisations and groups that actively participate in research, promotion and management activities in Canberra Nature Park include: » conservation organisations—National Parks Association of the ACT Inc., Canberra Ornithologists Group, Friends of Grasslands, Greening Australia, SEE-Change, Bush on the Boundary, Landcare ACT, the Conservation Council ACT Region and Ginninderra Catchment Group, Southern ACT Catchment Group and Molonglo Conservation Group. » Waterwatch » Frogwatch » Canberra Nature Map » educational organisations—ACT schools, Australian National University, University of Canberra and Canberra Institute of Technology. 8.3 Neighbours The location of most Canberra Nature Park reserves within an urban setting means that a large number of residential properties and other land uses are immediately adjacent, or close to reserve boundaries. Neighbours include: » residential neighbours » institutional neighbours, including Transport Canberra and City Services and other government agencies » horse paddocks and agistment areas » ACT Rural Landholders Association, Landcare groups and rural leaseholders. Rural leases have been issued over some areas of Canberra Nature Park (Kowen Escarpment, Rob Roy, Tuggeranong Hill, Urambi Hills, Crace Grasslands, West MacGregor Grasslands and Kinlyside) and some rural leases adjoin reserves. Neighbours have the potential to impact either positively or negatively on reserve values. Working collaboratively with neighbours can assist in achieving reserve management objectives and dealing with issues that cross tenures; for example, managing weeds and pests, controlling domestic animals, preventing the dumping of garden waste and limiting light and noise impacts. 8.4 Opportunities for further community involvement There are opportunities for the Parks and Conservation Service to enhance the interpretation and education information provided for Canberra Nature Park reserves to increase knowledge on reserve values. This could include working in partnership with neighbours and community organisations, educational institutions, recreational groups and conservation organisations that have a strong interest in, and knowledge about, reserves. There may be opportunities to expand the ParkCare program, including by adding additional groups and incorporating international volunteers. Environment.act.gov.au | 119.
8.5 Community involvement: management policies, objectives and actions Community involvement Nature’s classroom—providing educational experiences in Canberra Nature Park Policies » The Parks and Conservation Service will support environmental education and interpretation activities across Canberra Nature Park to increase community understanding and stewardship of reserve values. Objectives » Connections between people and nature are created by providing multiple ways for people of all ages and cultures to learn and be inspired by nature. » Education and interpretation increase community understanding of reserve values and involvement in their protection. » Online information about the about natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park is readily accessible. » Canberra’s kindergarten and primary school students have access to nature-based learning activities in Canberra Nature Park. » Visitors are aware of and comply with legislation and policies that guide access to, and appropriate use of, Canberra Nature Park. Actions 67. Deliver an interpretation strategy for Canberra Nature Park. 68. Encourage and facilitate increased educational programs and interpretation activities throughout Canberra Nature Park by working in partnerships with institutions and organisations that have a strong interest in, and knowledge of, reserve values. 69. Provide reserve users with accessible information to encourage appreciation of the natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park and appropriate use of the reserves. 70. Engage Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians in the interpretation of cultural heritage values, including the possible establishment of sites that interpret how Ngunnawal people use Canberra Nature Park, its food and its plants. 71. Establish ranger-led learning activities for kindergarten and primary school aged children, linked to the appropriate education curriculum. 72. Establish parkschool relationships with all schools in close proximity to Canberra Nature Park. 73. Update and promote best practice guidelines for reserve visitors and user-groups. 74. Provide educational material on topical issues such as: • current research • management of kangaroo populations • risks to reserves posed by invasive garden plants. 120 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Community involvement Community involvement in park management Policies » The Parks and Conservation Service will forge stronger partnerships and relationships with ParkCare and ‘Friends of‘ groups, catchment groups, and other volunteer groups, neighbours, Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations to increase community involvement in reserve management. Objectives » The knowledge and wisdom of Canberra’s community are harnessed to inform and enhance reserve management. » Community engagement programs and activities improve management outcomes for Canberra Nature Park. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians have increased involvement in land management and cultural activities. » Novel and diverse partnerships with private, corporate, NGO and government sectors contribute to the conservation of Canberra Nature Park and the environmental and socio-economic fabric of the ACT. Actions 75. Encourage and support volunteering, for example through ParkCare, catchment groups, schools and other community groups. 76. Expand the ParkCare model to support the establishment of new groups and the participation of international volunteers. 77. Ensure partners and volunteers are safe and equipped to manage day to day activities. 78. Maximise the contribution that communities can make to Canberra Nature Park by exploring innovative ways to tap into community skills, knowledge and enthusiasm. Environment.act.gov.au | 121.
GRASSLAND EARLESS DRAGON (TYMPANOCRYPTIS LINEATA) (PCS LIBRARY) CHAPTER 9 SUPPORTING AND ENCOURAGING RESEARCH: » Research supports evidence based management. » Woodlands and grasslands research includes the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodlands Experiment. » Citizen science activities provide valuable information about natural values. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » ACT Government research – threatened species, woodland and grassland ecology and restoration, kangaroo grazing and fire ecology. » Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program (CEMP) – a framework for monitoring and evaluating ecosystem condition and management effectiveness. » CEMP supports adaptive, evidence based decision making..
9. Research and monitoring 9.1 Natural values research The ACT Government continues to invest in research to deepen the knowledge and build evidence to improve conservation and management of the natural environment in Canberra Nature Park. Facilitating partnerships between government, research institutions and citizen scientists is a priority. Canberra Nature Park includes ‘site’ or ‘type’ localities of many invertebrate species, and several plant species and geological formations. Black Mountain Nature Reserve is particularly rich in this regard. Numerous scientific papers have been written using data collected by researchers at the Australian National University, University of Canberra, CSIRO, Australian Geological Survey Organisation and ACT Government. The collaborative research by the ACT Government and the Australian National University into woodland restoration at Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo nature reserves is of international significance (see section 9.1.1). Research undertaken in Canberra Nature Park has included studies on fungi, orchids, arboreal mammals, kangaroo grazing, impacts of invasive or overabundant species, declining woodland bird populations, and ecological restoration. Tens of academic research projects can be underway at any one time. The ACT Government undertakes its own research and encourages and guides the research of others. Current government research is focused on threatened species, kangaroo grazing, fire ecology, and woodland and grassland ecology and restoration. Citizen Science is recognised as making an increasingly important contribution to research, monitoring, and our knowledge of natural values in Canberra Nature Park (see section 9.1.3). Research provides the knowledge base for management. The ability to adapt management based on new research information will remain a key part of the management of Canberra Nature Park. A licence is required for research activities within Canberra Nature Park and, as a condition of the licence, a written report of the research findings must be submitted to the Parks and Conservation Service when the activity is completed. 9.1.1 Woodlands research Since 2004, Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo nature reserves have been the site of the long-term Mulligans Flat– Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment (Manning et al. 2011, Shorthouse et al. 2012). The experiment is a woodland research and restoration partnership between the ACT Government, the Australian National University and others, funded by partners and successive Australian Research Council Linkage grants. The research is aimed at a whole- of-ecosystem understanding of box–gum grassy woodlands with a focus on restoring the structure and function to increase biodiversity. The partnership aims to inform evidence-based conservation management in the ACT. Conservation treatments to date include replenishing fallen timber habitat with dead trees, excluding kangaroos from certain areas and experimental burning of some areas. The response of woodland biodiversity is monitored, including through: surveys of vegetation and fauna; research on arthropod assemblages; abundance of ground dwelling skinks; the impact of kangaroo grazing; and monitoring plots to trial different fire regimes. Environment.act.gov.au | 123.
Emerging from the research partnership, in 2009 the predator-proof Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary was established within the Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve to extend research to include species reintroductions, especially of locally extinct fauna. The Sanctuary originally encompassed 485 hectares of box–gum grassy woodland, protected by 11 kilometres of rabbit, cat and fox-proof fencing. Threatened species such as the Eastern Bettong (Bettongia gaimardi), Eastern Quoll (Dasyurus viverrinus), Bush Stone Curlew (Burhinus grallarius) and New Holland Mouse (Pseudomys novaehollandiae) have been re- introduced into the Sanctuary after many decades of local extinction. Future reintroductions of additional species may occur over time, based on expert advice. In 2019, the Sanctuary was extended to the south into Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve to include an additional 704 hectares of box–gum grassy woodland surrounded by a predator proof fence. Feral animals such as rabbits, hares, foxes, and cats have been removed and reintroductions of native species are taking place. The Sanctuary is supported by the Woodland and Wetlands Trust through expert advice, fund raising, innovative management, community support, education and nature-based recreation. www.woodlandsandwetlands.org.au/ The presence of the Sanctuary in Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo means that these reserves provide exciting, world leading opportunities in managing ecosystems and wildlife populations, including the reintroduction of species, managing grazing pressure, managing recreation and ensuring security of the fence. The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust and the Australian National University are currently developing a long-term vision and strategy for the Sanctuary. The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate and partners are also preparing a Mulligans Sanctuary action plan to guide management of the Sanctuary. RELEASE OF AN EASTERN BETTONG AT MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (EPSDD CONSERVATION RESEARCH) 124 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
9.1.2 Grasslands research Research undertaken by the ACT Government, often in partnership with research organisations such as local universities, has significantly contributed to the body of knowledge about the ecology and management of native grasslands and grassland species. This particularly applies to grassland threatened species and management of Eastern Grey Kangaroos. However, knowledge gaps still remain, such as long-term effects of grazing, burning and slashing/mowing regimes, the ecology of grassland species, and methods to promote threatened species recovery. The ACT Grassland Enhancement Program 2015–2018 was implemented as a partnership between the Parks and Conservation Service and ACT Natural Resource Management, partly funded by the Australian Government National Landcare Program. Activities included: » undertaking research into restoring natural disturbance regimes, primarily using fire » researching the habitat requirements of threatened grassland species » investigating techniques to replace exotic species with native species. The findings of this program are being implemented as part of the ACT Government’s herbage mass management and ecological burning programs. Monitoring will continue for at least five years after treatment. 9.1.3 Forest research Extensive research on forest ecosystems has been undertaken over many years in Canberra Nature Park, particularly in Black Mountain Nature Reserve, which has a history of more than 50 years of research and monitoring by the ACT and Commonwealth governments, universities, CSIRO and citizen scientists. Research on Black Mountain has included studies on the distribution, population size and age structure of selected fire sensitive tree and shrub species to provide baseline data for fire management; the timing of life cycle events such as flowering; and the habitat requirements of forest fauna species. EASTERN QUOLL (DASYURUS VIVERRINUS), MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (ADRIAN MANNING) RESEARCHERS FITTING A COLLAR ONTO AN EASTERN BETTONG (BETTONGIA GAIMARDI), MULLIGANS FLAT NATURE RESERVE (DON FLETCHER) Environment.act.gov.au | 125.
9.1.4 Citizen science Citizen science activities, carried out by organisations such as Frogwatch, Waterwatch, Vegwatch, the Australian Native Plants Society and the Canberra Ornithologists Group, have proven to be effective ways of gaining new information and increasing community understanding and appreciation of the natural values of Canberra Nature Park. ParkCare groups and other volunteers are using GIS mapping tools to record and report on issues such as the occurrence of weeds, rabbits and rabbits warrens, and informal tracks. Canberra Nature Map (https://canberra.naturemapr.org/) is an innovative mobile device app, developed and supported by volunteers, that allows anyone to report sightings of plant, animal and fungi species. The platform, supported by the ACT Government, currently provides public access to more than 1.25 million records of over 7000 local species and in excess of 250,000 wildlife images, and engages citizen scientists, naturalist groups and the public alike. Canberra Nature Map also acts as a conduit for community research with projects relating to fire and orchids, Gang-gang nesting, ant taxonomy and butterfly breeding ecology. New data are constantly being added. Canberra Nature Map aims to: » accurately map every rare plant and endangered animal in the ACT and maintain records for future generations » improve public education and awareness of the diversity and significance of Canberra’s natural areas » influence development decisions and protect Canberra’s natural values by providing critical species location data to government. By providing readily accessible and up-to-date location information, Canberra Nature Map enables a precautionary approach to be taken towards the management and protection of the uncommon species found within our reserves. 9.2 Cultural heritage research Research that increases knowledge and helps in the conservation of Aboriginal and historic sites and places, and the ongoing connection by Aboriginal people to Country, will be further encouraged and supported. The Parks and Conservation Service is working with ACT Heritage to develop an overarching cultural heritage management system that outlines the principles, policies and procedures that will be implemented by the Parks and Conservation Service to manage and conserve Aboriginal places and objects on protected land. 126 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
9.3 Monitoring Monitoring provides information on how a particular feature or indicator is trending over time and helps managers and policy makers make more informed decisions. It will often involve the repeated counting, measurement and/ or assessment of a variable, or variables, using standard methods each time. Monitoring: » informs how effective particular management actions have been and the level of threats present » provides direction into what future management may be appropriate » links management to conservation outcomes. Monitoring within Canberra Nature Park has largely related to the abundance and distribution of threatened or declining species, kangaroos, vertebrate pests and invasive plants, and the condition of reserve ecological values and responses to fire. Monitoring will continue for specific ecological communities in Canberra Nature Park, with key indicators selected to determine the effectiveness of management in conserving biodiversity. The ACT Government will be monitoring the ecological condition of Canberra Nature Park through the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program (CEMP), which provides a framework for monitoring and evaluating the condition of ecosystems and the effectiveness of management in achieving conservation objectives. The CEMP will gather, synthesise and analyse monitoring information collected across government and non-government sectors and report findings to environmental managers in a series of periodic technical reports and web-based dashboards that support adaptive, evidence-based decision making. SURVEYING VEGETATION ON BLACK MOUNTAIN NATURE RESERVE (EPSDD CONSERVATION RESEARCH) Environment.act.gov.au | 127.
Monitoring programs that contribute to adaptive management of Canberra Nature Park include: » ACT Government Environment Division • survey and monitoring of threatened species such as Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar), Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata), Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides), Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii), Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana), Button Wrinkle Wort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides), Ginninderra Peppercress (Lepidium ginninderrense), Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis) and Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) • annual surveys of Eastern Grey Kangaroo (Macropus giganteus) population densities, and their impacts on grassy habitats • quarterly spotlight monitoring of vertebrate pests, including rabbits • longitudinal studies of grassy ecosystem health and condition • studies of floristics and vegetation dynamics related to post-fire recovery in forest ecosystems » citizen science activities, including monitoring of threatened species, vertebrate pests and weeds, and to inform restoration activities » the long-term Canberra Ornithologist Group Woodland Bird Monitoring program, which is undertaken across 11 Canberra Nature Park reserves (and another five locations). Approval conditions under the EPBC Act require that environmental offset sites that have been included within Canberra Nature Park are also subject to a monitoring program. Monitoring is required to demonstrate how management interventions, as outlined in the offset management plans, have maintained or improved the condition, extent or population size of the relevant matters of national environmental significance protected within each offset site. Data from the offsets monitoring program will contribute towards assessing the condition of ecosystems within Canberra Nature Park through the CEMP. KANGAROO FERTILITY RESEARCH (EPSDD CONSERVATION RESEARCH) GRASSLAND EARLESS DRAGON RESEARCH (PCS LIBRARY) 128 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
9.4 Research and monitoring: management policies, objectives and actions Research and monitoring Policies » Research that improves knowledge and contributes to increased management effectiveness of natural and cultural values will be supported. » Opportunities will be sought for collaborative partnerships with universities and other research sectors and institutions to inform and improve park management. » Citizen science will be supported. Objectives » Research and monitoring inform adaptive management of natural and cultural values. » ACT Government research provides a sound evidence base for land management and conservation decisions in Canberra Nature Park. » Universities in Canberra have established long term social and ecological research programs across Canberra Nature Park. Actions 79. Continue to support research partnerships with universities and other research institutions. 80. Continue to develop and implement the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program to inform adaptive management across Canberra Nature Park. 81. Prioritise research with a focus on: • ecology and population genetics of threatened or declining species • processes driving the abundance, distribution and condition of reserve ecological values • vegetation and wildlife response to different fire regimes, including the season, frequency and intensity of burning • developing effective restoration and management techniques for threatened communities and species habitat • the desirability and feasibility of reintroducing locally extinct native animal species • the implications of climate change for the biota of the region • developing a better understanding of the types, levels and impacts of recreation and visitor use • supporting the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary, and the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. 82. Support and promote the use of citizen science and integrate results into management. Environment.act.gov.au | 129.
LOOKOUT ON MOUNT AINSLIE NATURE RESERVE (MARK JEKABSONS) CHAPTER 10 MINIMISING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS: » Development proposals require environmental impact assessment. » National Capital Authority approves works in Designated Areas. » Actions impacting on matters of national environmental significance require referral under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. » Maintenance works are subject to relevant code/s of practice and require works plans. » Agreements with public utility agencies outline conditions to avoid or minimise impacts. MANAGEMENT APPROACH: » Conservation Officers under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 may exercise a range of powers to protect, conserve and enhance the biodiversity of the ACT, including issuing infringement notices for a range of offences..
10. Planning, approvals and compliance This chapter considers a number of functions and requirements not considered elsewhere in this plan. If an activity is proposed and there is uncertainty regarding approval processes, the advice of the Parks and Conservation Service should be sought before the activity starts. 10.1 Environmental assessment and approval Environmental assessment requirements for developments in the ACT are contained in the Planning and Development Act. Schedule 4 of the Act lists development proposals that trigger the requirement for environmental impact assessment (Part 4.3, see item 3). Any development proposal within a nature reserve or special purpose reserve will require the preparation of an environmental impact assessment unless the Conservator provides an Environmental Significance Opinion (ESO) indicating that the proposal is not likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact. This does not apply if the works are exempted under a code of practice made by the Conservator. In deciding a development application for a development proposal in Canberra Nature Park, the decision maker must consider this reserve management plan. Development is defined in s.7 of the Act and includes building, earthworks or other construction work, carrying out work that would affect the landscape, and using the land. It is preferable that environmental considerations be part of the early stages of any development proposal (an environmental planning approach). Where a number of projects are planned, it is desirable to address these collectively in order to determine cumulative impacts. 10.1.1 Designated Areas Proposed works in reserves that are Designated Areas within Canberra Nature Park are not subject to Territory development assessment processes, and must be approved by the National Capital Authority. For works in Designated Areas, a Nature Conservation Licence under the Nature Conservation Act will be required in addition to the above requirements. The provisions of the Heritage Act also apply to activities of non- Commonwealth entities on Designated Land. 10.1.2 Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 Under the EPBC Act, any action that has, will have, or is likely to have a significant impact on matters of national environmental significance, such as Commonwealth-listed threatened species or ecological communities, must be referred to the Commonwealth for approval. As many Canberra Nature Park reserves have threatened species or communities present, any proposals for major works within reserves are likely to trigger assessment under the EPBC Act. Environment.act.gov.au | 131.
10.2 Management operations and environmental protection Maintenance of environmental quality is a legislative and government policy requirement in managing Canberra Nature Park. Part of the role of management is to manage human activities that have the potential to impact on reserve values and visitors. Maintenance works undertaken by the Parks and Conservation Service are subject to the relevant approval code/s of practice and require works plans to be prepared. 10.2.1 Public utilities The Conservator may propose a management agreement with any public utility agency that supplies gas, electricity, water or sewage services, or any entity responsible for the construction, repair and maintenance of navigation serving beacons and telecommunications within Canberra Nature Park (under the Nature Conservation Act, Chapter 12). The agreement will outline standards and conditions to avoid or minimise any conflict with management objectives for a reserve and the conditions will also apply to contractors undertaking work for public utility providers. Management agreements are in place for Icon Water, ActewAGL and several other utility providers operating in Canberra Nature Park. Management agreements will be developed for those utility providers operating in Canberra Nature Park currently without one. Major work by utility suppliers and other agencies will be subject to a licence under the Nature Conservation Act or Environmental Impact Assessment approval. 10.2.2 Water quality Clean water is essential for the health of aquatic ecosystems, to provide safe drinking water and for recreation. Conservation goals for the river and riparian zones in Canberra Nature Park are set out in the ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans (ACT Government 2018). The Environment Protection Regulation 2005 sets out water quality standards for the protection of waterways relating to issues such as pollution, storm water discharge, etc. 10.2.3 Water and energy use It is desirable for Canberra Nature Park to implement efficient systems for the use of energy and water in line with ACT Government policies: the ACT Water Strategy 2014–2044: Striking the Balance (ACT Government 2014); and ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–2025 (ACT Government 2019b). 10.2.4 Air quality Smoke from prescribed burning and bushfires is likely to occur seasonally. The Parks and Conservation Service is authorised by the Environment Protection Authority under the Environment Protection Act 1997 to conduct prescribed burning. The Smoke Management Conditions and Smoke Management Guidelines for Prescribed Burning are specified under Environmental Authorisation 0412. https://www.rgoonline.act.gov.au/pubreg/epd/ epa/authorisations/0412.pdf. 132 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
10.2.5 Waste management Bins are not provided within Canberra Nature Park and visitors generally accept that they take away their rubbish. This policy will be continued. 10.2.6 Chemicals and hazardous materials Chemicals and hazardous materials are used in Canberra Nature Park for pest plant and animal control, fire suppression, and in the course of routine management activities. It is the responsibility of managers and contractors to ensure that the requirements of the Environment Protection Act and any subsequent environmental authorisations are met as well as occupational health and safety requirements. 10.2.7 Public roads, lookouts, and catch and cut-off drains Public roads border many Canberra Nature Park reserves and lead to summit lookouts on Red Hill, Mount Ainslie, Black Mountain, Mount Taylor and Mount Pleasant. Maintenance and management of the roads and lookouts has the potential to adversely impact reserve values; for example, weed seed distribution through mowing/slashing, ignition of fires by people in passing vehicles (either deliberately or accidentally) and littering. Catch and cut-off drains have been built upslope of suburbs (sometimes within the nature reserve boundary) to protect residential areas from surface water run-off. Drains are often integrated into management trails on the edges of reserves. Design and construction is determined by the local site conditions but must be compatible with conservation of environmental values. The upgrade and maintenance of roads, lookouts and drains can cause disturbance to soils, drainage problems and disruption to visitor access. This infrastructure is the responsibility of Transport Canberra and City Services (TCCS). The Parks and Conservation Service and TCCS will continue to cooperate to address any concerns arising from this infrastructure. 10.3 Firearms and other weapons Possession and use of firearms is not permitted in Canberra Nature Park. Under the Nature Conservation Act, it is also an offence to use or possess other weapons (such as bows and arrows), or a trap, net, snare or other device capable of capturing animals without a licence from the ACT Conservator. Firearms and other weapons may be used only for management purposes by authorised officers in accordance with legislation and ACT Government policy, including codes of practice. 10.4 Domestic animals The Nature Conservation Act prohibits taking non-native animals onto a nature reserve except as permitted by the Conservator (through an Activities Declaration or a Nature Conservation Licence) (see section 7.4). Dog walking and horse riding are permitted as restricted activities through Activities Declarations only in reserves indicated in Table 7.1. Restrictions do not apply to assistance animals or dogs otherwise exempted under the Domestic Animals Act. Environment.act.gov.au | 133.
10.5 Resource extraction Resource extraction, such as stone from quarries or cutting timber for fence posts, is part of the history of Canberra Nature Park. In accordance with the legislative objectives for nature reserves, resource extraction is limited to small scale use of local materials for management purposes only. An example would be local sourcing of road and track materials, which may be preferable to obtaining materials from elsewhere that may contain potential weeds or pathogens. The following activities are prohibited: » timber cutting and firewood removal (except for management purposes) » taking rocks, gravel or soil (except for management purposes) » taking, killing, picking, defacing or otherwise disturbing natural or cultural features (unless licenced by the Conservator, for example for research). 10.6 Contaminated sites Contaminated sites in Canberra Nature Park are derived primarily from past land uses. They include former rural sheep dips, historic municipal landfills and old building waste dumps with some sites identified as containing bonded asbestos. These sites are managed in accordance with the Contaminated Sites Environment Protection Policy (ACT Government 2017c), made under the Environment Protection Act. Management of these sites will involve site investigations and appropriate sampling as required as a basis for public health and environmental risk assessment. Management plans will be developed to ensure protection of human health and the environment where a risk exists, and a remedial action plan will be prepared for any site assessed as posing an unacceptable public health and/or environmental risk. Suitably qualified environmental consultants will be engaged for actions associated with contaminated sites. 10.7 Suburban residents and neighbours 10.7.1 Access to residential back yards Suburban residents neighbouring a reserve may seek short-term approval from the Parks and Conservation Service for vehicle access through a reserve; for example, to access a residential back yard. Fees and conditions apply and rehabilitation of any impacts on soil or vegetation is required. 10.7.2 Destruction of termite nests within a nature reserve Termites are an important component of Australian ecosystems, and termite nests within Canberra Nature Park are a part of the natural values of reserves. However, termites may at times present a risk to structures within or adjacent to reserves. A termite nest within a reserve may be destroyed in certain circumstances, requiring the written approval of the Conservator. Destruction of a termite nest within a reserve, if approved, can only be undertaken by an appropriately qualified and authorised pest controller. 134 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
10.7.3 Removal of a tree within a nature reserve Native trees within a reserve boundary are not permitted to be removed except for public safety. If a tree within a reserve is a safety concern, for example a tree on a suburban boundary, a request for an assessment may be made to the Parks and Conservation Service. Native trees within a reserve boundary will not be removed to improve solar access for neighbouring houses. Reserve neighbours considering installation of a solar system must take into account shading from reserve trees prior to installation. Trees within reserves may be removed for management purposes, for example as part of an ecological thinning program. 10.7.4 Memorials within a nature reserve The Small Memorials Policy in ACT Forests and Reserves applies within Canberra Nature Park. Only small memorials, as described in the policy, will be considered and approval is subject to decision by the Regional Manager of the relevant area https://www.environment.act.gov.au/about-us/legislation-policies-guidelines. In areas identified in the National Capital Plan as Designated Areas, Guidelines for Commemorative Works in the National Capital apply. 10.7.5 Unauthorised residential lease encroachments In some older suburbs, the boundary between a residential lease and a nature reserve may not be well defined on the ground, and some suburban neighbours have built structures outside their residential lease and within the nature reserve (unleased public land). Intentional urban encroachment into a nature reserve, for example from structures, garden beds and plantings, is not acceptable and removal and repair of the area may be required by law. 10.7.6 Areas within Canberra Nature Park managed under tenancy agreements or other arrangements There are a few small areas within Canberra Nature Park that are not currently managed by the Parks and Conservation Service (see section 1.10.1). These areas are subject to either tenancy agreements or other less formal arrangements, which will be reviewed during the life of this plan. Environment.act.gov.au | 135.
10.8 Rural leases Rural leases apply in Kinlyside and West MacGregor Grasslands nature reserves and in parts of Crace Grasslands, Kowen Escarpment, Rob Roy, Tuggeranong Hill and Urambi Hills nature reserves. Rural leases are issued under the Planning and Development Act, and lessees are required to prepare a Land Management Agreement documenting an agreed approach to the management of soil, water, native vegetation, pest plants and animals, drought and bushfire risk. Where rural lease and nature reserve both apply, the Land Management Agreement must be consistent with the objectives outlined in this reserve management plan and must be approved by the Conservator. For example, stock grazing can be used if necessary to maintain habitat for threatened grassland species such as Golden Sun Moth and Striped Legless Lizard (see section 2.5.2). No public access is allowed to rural lease areas without permission from the rural lessee. The nature reserve zoning maps in Part 2 show existing rural lease areas. 10.9 Compliance and enforcement The Parks and Conservation Service has a risk-based approach to regulation, promoting voluntary compliance through education and prioritising compliance and enforcement activities based on risk of harm. Parks and Conservation Service staff are authorised Conservation Officers under the Nature Conservation Act and may exercise a range of powers to protect, conserve and enhance the biodiversity of the ACT. These powers include issuing directions to protect our nature reserves and restore any damage. Where appropriate, infringement notices may be issued for a range of offences, or prosecution action may be commenced via the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions for breaches of the Nature Conservation Act or other legislation. 136 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
10.10 Planning, approvals and compliance: management policies, objectives and actions Planning, approvals and compliance Policies » Relevant statutory processes will be followed for all proposed activities and works in Canberra Nature Park. » New infrastructure will utilise the lowest impact option and will only be located: • in already disturbed areas or co-located with other services • with reference to reserve management zones. Objectives » Appropriate environmental assessments are undertaken to ensure that reserve values are not damaged or compromised. » Monitoring of activities ensures that actions avoid or minimise impact on reserve values, and that any damage is repaired. » Visitors comply with all legislative and policy requirements. » Rural leases over nature reserves are managed for identified conservation outcomes. Actions 83. Ensure all works proposed in reserves are subject to appropriate assessment and approval processes to minimise impacts on reserve values, including habitat connectivity. 84. Establish management agreements under the Nature Conservation Act with all major utility providers operating in Canberra Nature Park. 85. Implement hygiene protocols during all works, management activities and events. 86. Monitor management activities and approved works and report non-compliance against approval conditions. 87. Seek to recover costs associated with rehabilitating damage caused by others. 88. Increase compliance efforts to minimise impacts of illegal and inappropriate behaviour on reserve visitors and conservation values. 89. Record and analyse incidents of behaviour in breach of legislation or incompatible with the provisions of this plan and take appropriate action, including the issuing of infringement notices or prosecution where necessary. 90. Harness technology to improve delivery and reporting of management actions. 91. Identify, assess and manage risks associated with contaminated sites in reserves, in accordance with the Contaminated Sites Environment Protection Policy 2017 made under the Environment Protection Act 1997. 92. Ensure that Land Management Agreements prescribe the protection of identified values. 93. Support lessees to protect identified conservation values on rural leases. 94. Monitor conservation values in rural leases within Canberra Nature Park. 95. Review tenancy agreements and other informal arrangements for areas not managed by the Parks and Conservation Service. Environment.act.gov.au | 137.
Part 2 CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE COMPLEXES AND SUMMARY PROFILES.
Reserve complexes Canberra Nature Park is made up of 39 individual reserves, many of which are conjoined or close to one another. Others share similar geology, vegetation communities and habitat niches. Grouping reserves with similar characteristics, management priorities and/or geographical proximity into ‘complexes’ helps land managers prioritise management activities in individual reserves in the context of the surrounding landscape. Considering reserves as a ‘complex’ helps management in a number of ways: » Maintaining ecological connectivity across the landscape is a key management priority for conservation of woodland communities. Linking woodlands between component reserves, neighbouring complexes and other ecological communities—such as grassland, riparian, wetland and forest areas—serves to strengthen landscape habitat heterogeneity, thereby aiding dispersal of species, supporting access to refugia in extreme conditions, and building resilience in a changing climate. » A landscape-scale perspective for operational programs such as pest plant and animal control and kangaroo and fire management can help in prioritising and allocating resources, staff and volunteer effort for the most effective outcomes. For example, grasslands in Gungahlin are isolated from one another by urban infrastructure—considering grassland management across a complex allows for more strategic planning and implementation of management activities. » Ecological burning, grazing stock rotation and seasonal monitoring require high-level planning and coordination of resources at multiple levels. Undertaking these activities across multiple sites achieves better conservation outcomes and more efficient use of time and resources. » A complex perspective also supports a strategic approach to planning for infrastructure and recreational use within reserves. Canberra Nature Park reserves have been grouped into the following complexes: Northern Woodlands—These are high-quality critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and dry forest communities, with good links to regional woodlands over the NSW border. Central Grasslands—This group of reserves represents Natural Temperate Grassland and associated native and exotic grasslands, as well as areas of remnant woodland. Reserves fall into groups at two locations—the Gungahlin Valley and Belconnen. Sandstone Reserves—The distinctive sandstone geology underlying Black Mountain and nearby reserves supports a rich and diverse vegetation unusual in the ACT, with a high number of rare and threatened plant species. Connections with Rivers—Reserves in this group, which are generally more disturbed than other complexes, share key management aims of restoring vegetation and conserving Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. Kowen Escarpment and Molonglo Gorge—These reserves, containing dry forest and woodland communities, are located along the ‘Queanbeyan Fault’. Molonglo Gorge includes the only reserved river corridor in Canberra Nature Park. The reserves are part of an important north–south regional wildlife corridor and are the major habitat of several plant species rare in the ACT. Woden Woodlands and Grasslands—Located south of Lake Burley Griffin, this complex supports high-quality box–gum woodland transitioning into the grasslands of the Jerrabomberra Valley. Southern Hills—These reserves protect large areas of high-quality dry forest community and associated woodlands. With less urban edge than other groups and good connection across to Namadgi National Park and the Australian Alps national parks, this complex has a greater potential to support wild small mammal populations. 140 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 141.
Northern Woodlands Goorooyarroo, Justice Robert Hope Park, Kinlyside, Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura, Mount Pleasant, Mulligans Flat and Nadjung Mada nature reserves Description Located in Canberra’s north, this group of reserves represents the transition of dry sclerophyll forest on the hills and ridges to woodlands on the lower slopes, merging with the grasslands remaining on the floor of the Majura Valley. Stands of Drooping She-oak and rare Snow Gum Grassy Woodland occur in some areas. These forest and woodland vegetation communities form part of an extensive corridor that extends beyond the northern ACT border as well as connecting through the Majura Training Area down to the Molonglo River. It is an important part of several regional wildlife movement corridors, including the Great Eastern Ranges corridor, which runs from Victoria to North Queensland, generally along the coastal escarpment, and the Southern Flyway, a connection of woodland vegetation across the ACT and the southern slopes and central west of NSW. The complex includes the Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo reserves that together form the largest and best quality reserved area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in Australia. The Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment and associated Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Sanctuary have been established in these reserves. Nature reserves in this grouping are generally in good condition, supporting areas rich in wildflowers, including rare and threatened plants, and habitat for a variety of mammal, bird, reptile and invertebrate species. These Northern Woodlands reserves are popular with local residents and tourists alike. The Sanctuary sees interstate visitors drawn to the attractions of the reintroduced native species such as the Eastern Bettong and Eastern Quoll. Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura and Mount Pleasant attract a significant number of Canberra residents and the Mount Ainslie Summit track provides visitors with panoramic views over the city and beyond to the mountains. With the exception of Kinlyside, a range of low-key recreational facilities, including part of the Centenary Trail, will continue to provide reserve visitors with opportunities to access and enjoy a range of activities that are compatible with the protection of natural and cultural values. Future directions The addition of reserved lands (from environmental offsets), including Justice Robert Hope Park, Kinlyside, Nadjung Mada and the extensions to Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Nature Reserves, has increased the area of endangered ecological communities and threatened species under protection and strengthened the ecological connectivity in this landscape. These additions, and the extension of the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Sanctuary predator-proof fence, will provide further refuge for a number of threatened and declining plant and animal species, thereby building resilience in this landscape to face the uncertain challenges of climate change. In the Northern Woodlands complex, strengthening linkages within and between component reserves and beyond into neighbouring complexes and woodland areas in NSW will support ecosystem function and resilience. On- reserve infrastructure across much of the northern complex is complemented by off-reserve facilities that offer visitors a range of nature-based recreation and tourism experiences. Significant Aboriginal and historic cultural sites across this landscape reflect the historical layering of ancient culture and Canberra’s origins. Support for continuing Aboriginal connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local level management intent specific to each reserve. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform the land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and direction for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 142 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 143.
Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve Establishment: Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve (829 hectares) was established in 2004 and extended in 2014 (environmental offset). A small part of the reserve is Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve forms part of a 2000 hectare contiguous area of critically endangered Yellow Box– Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in the northern ACT, providing important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Goorooyarroo protects: » the largest remaining area of Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in the ACT (1,384 hectares in Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo combined) and largest reserved extent nationally » a regional stronghold for several threatened or uncommon woodland plant, grasshopper, lizard, bird and mammal species » part of one of the largest areas of habitat for the endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) in the ACT region » one of a few ACT regular breeding areas for the vulnerable Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) » the internationally important Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists 28 Aboriginal heritage sites. Other historic heritage places of interest include survey markers, a stone fence and a slab hut ruin. Recreation: Goorooyarroo is heavily used for walking and cycling, particularly on the Centenary Trail. Dogs and horses are prohibited in the reserve. Research: Together with Mulligans Flat, the reserve is a key part of a woodland research site of international importance. Research is supported by the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. Community Involvement: Friends of Mulligans Flat provides volunteer support to land management work in Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve. Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the north of the reserve since 1998 and in the south since 2004. Management: The long-term aim for the reserve is to conserve and rehabilitate the extent and understorey condition of box–gum woodland, the extent of Golden Sun Moth and Striped Legless Lizard habitat, maintain a Superb Parrot breeding population, and to continue support for the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust and the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage offset areas in accordance with offset management plans » maintain and improve connectivity to other woodland areas » improve recreational management and interpretation in partnership with the Trust » develop and implement a conservation management plan for significant heritage places and objects » protect grassland fauna and woodland bird habitat, including Superb Parrot breeding trees. ANDREW TATNELL 144 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10. Environment.act.gov.au | 145.
Justice Robert Hope Park Nature Reserve Establishment: Justice Robert Hope Park (19 hectares) was established in 2016 as an environmental offset. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is on the lower slopes of Mount Majura and is relatively flat with scattered mature trees and a grassy understorey. It is a small part of an extensive area of forest and woodland in the northern ACT that provides important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Justice Robert Hope Park protects: » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » large old hollow-bearing trees (200–400 years old) that provide nesting hollows and are important seasonal nectar sources and foraging habitat for canopy-dwelling birds and arboreal fauna. Cultural values: The reserve is named after Justice Robert Marsden Hope AC CMG QC (1919–1999), a barrister, judge and the first Chairman of the Heritage Council of NSW. Justice Hope’s Committee of Inquiry into the National Estate led to acknowledgment of the concept of a National Estate and its protection as part of our heritage. See https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/original/00003221.pdf. Recreation: Pedestrian access points have been established into the Justice Robert Hope Park. Dogs on leash are permitted on a track or trail. Horses and cycling are prohibited. Community Involvement: Watson Woodlands Working Group (a member of Watson Community Association) helps protect the area and undertakes volunteer activities in the nature reserve. See http://www.northcanberra.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2009/01/Woodlands-History1.pdf Management: The long-term management aim is to improve the overall reserve condition. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the offset area in accordance with the offset management plan » monitor rehabilitation work following infrastructure development on the western edge » continue to conserve ground cover diversity with the support of the Watson Woodlands Working Group. ANDREW TATNELL 146 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 147.
Kinlyside Nature Reserve Establishment: Kinlyside Nature Reserve (228 hectares) was established in 2014 as an environmental offset under the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve forms part of a 2000 hectare contiguous area of critically endangered Yellow Box– Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in the northern ACT, providing important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Kinlyside protects: » a large area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » a woodland understorey with several plant species considered rare in the ACT » important habitat for threatened and regionally declining woodland birds, including the Diamond Firetail (Stagonopleura guttata), Southern Whiteface (Aphelocephala leucopsis) and Varied Sitella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) » habitat for a large population of endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) and a small population of vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella). In the past, Kinlyside was conservatively grazed by stock for many decades. This: » prevented thick sapling regrowth that inhibits quality Golden Sun Moth and Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat » supported Golden Sun Moth requirements for relatively short grasslands (dominated by spaced Wallaby and Corkscrew grass tussocks) » supported a high-quality understorey. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists 30 Aboriginal heritage sites, including scarred trees where bark and timber were removed for cultural use. Some features of 19th century landscape use also remain. Recreation: Kinlyside is currently a closed nature reserve (s.259 of the Nature Conservation Act). There is no public access and dogs, horses and cycling are prohibited. Access restrictions: Kinlyside is currently under a rural lease. Access to the reserve is prohibited except for the lessee, and a person authorised by the lessee. Community involvement: Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the area since 1998. Management: The long-term management aim is to conserve and improve the extent and understorey condition of box–gum woodland and the extent and condition of Golden Sun Moth habitat. Management will be in accordance with the offset management plan. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage in accordance with an offset management plan » use grazing as a method for fire fuel management adjacent to the suburb of Casey. ANDREW TATNELL 148 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 149.
Mount Ainslie Nature Reserve Establishment: Mount Ainslie Nature Reserve (637 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive area of forest and woodland in the northern ACT that provides important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Mount Ainslie protects: » a large area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » important breeding habitat of threatened and regionally declining woodland birds and raptors » stands of Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata), which are an important foraging resource for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami lathami) » major habitat of the critically endangered Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis) and endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans); habitat for ten rare plant species; breeding habitat for the rare Rosenberg’s Goanna (Varanus rosenbergi). Cultural values: The reserve is a significant Aboriginal women’s cultural place, and a key landmark in the northern ACT for Aboriginal groups travelling south into the mountains. The ACT Heritage Register lists over 30 Aboriginal heritage sites, including culturally modified trees. Recreation: The reserve is heavily used by walkers, runners, cyclists and horse riders and for organised events. The Centenary Trail passes through the reserve and the scenic lookout is a popular tourist destination. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Access restrictions: Unexploded ordnance (UXO) has been found on the eastern side of the reserve and off-track access to this area is restricted. Signs guide visitor use. Recreational use of the previous landfill site at the northern end of the reserve is discouraged. Community involvement: Mount Ainslie Weeders has undertaken activities on Mount Ainslie since the early 1990s. Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the reserve since 2000. Management: The long-term management aim for the reserve is to conserve the diversity and abundance of native plant species and improve habitat structure for woodland animals. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » protect bird breeding habitat on the eastern side of Mount Ainslie and avoid disturbance during the breeding season, including potential temporary closure of some areas » protect the Canberra Spider Orchid site and other threatened and rare plant sites » protect the stands of Drooping She-oak as a food source for the Glossy Black-cockatoo » manage the increasing recreation across the reserve through improved signage and enforcement » review, rationalise rehabilitate and stabilise tracks to reduce erosion and other impacts » support Mount Ainslie Weeders in rehabilitating the former tip site and undertaking other work. ANDREW TATNELL 150 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10. Environment.act.gov.au | 151.
Mount Majura Nature Reserve Establishment: Mount Majura Nature Reserve (502 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive area of forest and woodland in the northern ACT that provides important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Mount Majura protects: » stands of Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata), an important foraging resource for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami lathami) » a large area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on the lower slopes, and rare Snow Gum Grassy Woodland on the eastern slopes » regionally important breeding habitat for many threatened and regionally declining woodland birds » nectar producing woodland/forest, which attracts threatened or declining nomadic or migratory woodland birds, e.g. Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolour) and Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) » major habitat of critically endangered Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis) and endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) and habitat for several other rare plants; breeding habitat for the rare Rosenberg’s Monitor (Varanus rosenbergi). Cultural values: The reserve is an important Aboriginal men’s cultural place and provided a key landmark in the northern ACT for Aboriginal groups travelling south into the mountains. Recreation: Mount Majura is heavily used by walkers, runners, cyclists and horse riders, and for organised events. The Centenary Trail passes through the reserve. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Community involvement: Friends of Mount Majura has undertaken significant habitat restoration works across the reserve, particularly in areas impacted by past grazing practices. Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the reserve since 1998. Management: The long-term aim for the reserve is to conserve and rehabilitate the diversity and abundance of native plant species and improve habitat structure for woodland animals. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain and improve habitat connectivity to other woodland areas » support the increasing recreational use of the reserve through improved signage and compliance » continue habitat improvement and restoration works in partnership with the Friends of Mount Majura » protect bird breeding areas, Glossy Black-cockatoo habitat, the Canberra Spider Orchid site and other threatened and rare plants » investigate ‘single track’ options to connect Majura Pines and Hackett, to minimise environmental impact and illegal mountain bike use on walking tracks » continue to support Friends of Mount Majura. ANDREW TATNELL 152 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 153.
Mount Pleasant Nature Reserve Establishment: Mount Pleasant Nature Reserve (57 hectares) was established in 1993. The reserve is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is a small part of an extensive area of forest and woodland in the northern ACT that provides important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Mount Pleasant protects: » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » habitat of threatened bird species, the Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides) and Speckled Warbler (Pyrrholaemus saggitatus). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists three Aboriginal heritage sites and the Duntroon Dairy which was built in 1832 to supply products to the Duntroon Estate. The dairy is considered the ACT’s oldest standing building and is an important reminder of a self-sufficient way of life on a (then) remote pastoral property. The lower western slope of Mount Pleasant includes a plantation of mixed species that were established under the supervision of Charles Weston as part of Burley Griffin’s plan to re-forest Canberra’s denuded inner hills. Recreation: The reserve is heavily used by walkers, runners and cyclists and for organised events. A scenic lookout near the summit has a number of memorials. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses are prohibited. Community involvement: Friends of Mount Pleasant has undertaken activities on the western side of the reserve with an emphasis on eliminating woody weeds and invasive exotic groundcover. Management: The long-term management aim for the reserve is to conserve vegetation structure for birds. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain woodland condition and connectivity to other reserve areas » manage Duntroon Dairy according to the Conservation Management Plan » continue to support Friends of Mount Pleasant. ANDREW TATNELL 154 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 155.
Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve Establishment: Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve (984 hectares) was established in 1993, and additional areas have been added including an environmental offset in 2014. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve forms part of a 2000 hectare contiguous area of critically endangered Yellow Box– Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in the northern ACT, providing important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Natural values: Mulligans Flat protects: » the largest remaining area of Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in the ACT (1384 hectares in Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo combined) and largest reserved extent nationally » a regional stronghold for several threatened or uncommon woodland plants and grasshopper, lizard, bird and mammal species » a major component of one of the largest areas of continuous habitat in the ACT region for the endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists over 50 Aboriginal heritage sites, the Old Coach Road and the Mulligans Flat Ploughlands within the reserve. Other historic heritage sites include remnants of huts/homesteads, schools, woolsheds and border markers. Recreation: The fenced wildlife Sanctuary attracts visitors, particularly those interested in wildlife conservation. Regular guided activities are a feature. The reserve is heavily used for walking and cycling, including on the Centenary Trail. Horse riding is permitted only on the Bicentennial National Trail along the southern edge of Little Mulligans. Dogs are prohibited. A new Woodland Learning Centre is to be opened at Throsby in 2022 as a major focus for environmental education in Canberra. Research: Together with Goorooyarroo, the reserve is a key part of a woodland research site of international importance. Research is supported by the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. Community involvement: Friends of Mulligans Flat contributes to land management work, assists with Woodlands and Wetlands Trust outreach and ecological activities and ANU research projects, and holds interpretive walks several times a year. The Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the reserve since 1995. Management: The long-term aim for the reserve is to conserve and rehabilitate the box–gum woodland, Golden Sun Moth habitat and Superb Parrot breeding sites. Support for the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust and the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment will continue. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage offset areas in accordance with offset management plans » support the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment and the extended Sanctuary » facilitate improved recreational management and interpretation in partnership with the Trust » develop and implement a conservation management plan for significant heritage places and objects » continue to support Friends of Mulligans Flat. ANDREW TATNELL 156 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 157.
Nadjung Mada Nature Reserve Establishment: Nadjung Mada Nature Reserve (approx.160 hectares) was established in 2021 as a reserve and an environmental offset area and is identified as a Category 1 Conservation site in the ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Nadjung Mada is a Ngunnawal language name meaning ‘wet land’. Connectivity: The woodlands in Nadjung Mada Nature Reserve provide a linkage and movement corridor between Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve and woodland, remnant trees, planted gardens and open space in the Watson area. Superb Parrots, listed as nationally vulnerable, utilise this link daily during the breeding season while feeding nesting young. Natural values: Nadjung Mada Nature Reserve: » contains approximately 85 hectares of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. The woodland is characterised by old growth Yellow Box trees (150–500 years old) which are part of a Yellow Box on Lowland Valley Flats (below 620 metres) vegetation type that has been extensively cleared and now has a highly restricted distribution » supports approximately 300 large old woodland trees on moist and nutrient rich soils. Unusual for these open woodlands, it provides a relatively rich and regular flowering and insect resource for birds and other arboreal wildlife and is of importance to maintaining local wildlife » contains approximately 112 hectares of habitat of the vulnerable Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) » is one of about 30 known ACT locations of the vulnerable and regionally endemic Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea). Cultural values: Three Aboriginal heritage sites of cultural and archaeological significance have been recorded in the reserve. The sites are afforded protection under the Heritage Act. Four historic heritage sites are present in the reserve: a section of the Old Well Station Road alignment; two stockyards; and a stock trough and enclosure. These four sites are remnants of the pastoral history of the area. Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreational activities are compatible with the reserve. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Biycles are only permitted on Old Well Station Road. Dogs are prohibited. Management: Nadjung Mada Nature Reserve is a flat grassland and open woodland area within East Gungahlin. The area has a long history of stock grazing and as a result, vegetation condition is mixed. Management targets for the reserve include increasing the diversity of non-grass native species, restoring native groundcover and improving the ecological condition of the woodland areas for woodland birds. The long-term management of the reserve aims to increase the ecological condition and connectivity of the box– gum woodland and Striped Legless Lizard habitat and increase the Striped Legless Lizard population. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the area in accordance with the offset management plan (in preparation). ANDREW TATNELL 158 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 159.
Central Grasslands Budjan Galindji, Crace, Dunlop, Gungaderra, Jarramlee/West MacGregor and Mulanggari Grasslands Nature Reserves. Description This group of reserves in Canberra’s northern suburbs protects remnants of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland and other native grasslands, transitioning to box–gum woodland in some areas. The reserves provide important habitat for threatened and declining grassland reptile and invertebrate species, and support populations of rare and threatened plants. Woodland areas provide habitat for rare and threatened woodland birds. The presence of numerous stone artefacts in the reserves provides physical evidence of the long history of Aboriginal occupation of the region. The Aboriginal chert quarry complex in Mulanggari Grasslands Nature Reserve is highly valued by Ngunnawal people and significant for the information it provides on Aboriginal technology, occupation and resource use. Recreational use of the reserves is relatively low: in many areas only low-level activities such as walking or bird watching are compatible with the maintenance of reserve values. Dogs are not permitted in several of the reserves. Future directions Management of the central grasslands will focus on protecting and improving grasslands that provide habitat for threatened and declining species of reptiles, invertebrates and plants. This will involve developing and implementing improvement programs to sustain ecosystem function, including promoting structural complexity and heterogeneity across grasslands, in partnership with scientists, the local Aboriginal community, ParkCare groups, citizen scientists and the community. Continuing effective weed control, and management of fire and grazing pressure to maximise conservation outcomes will be important aspects of managing these reserves. Strengthening links between reserves and beyond to other woodland, grassland and riparian areas will support landscape scale heterogeneity and improve ecosystem function and resilience. Actions required under offset management plans will be implemented in relevant areas. Increasing community understanding of grassland values and engagement in their protection, particularly in neighbouring suburbs, will be an important factor in the long-term conservation of these grassland environments. Cultural heritage sites will be protected and interpreted where appropriate. Support for continuing Aboriginal connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local-level actions to guide management. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and directions for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 160 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 161.
Budjan Galindji Grasslands Nature Reserve Establishment: Budjan Galindji Grasslands Nature Reserve (20 hectares) was established in 2020 as an environmental offset area and is identified as a Category 1 Conservation Site in the ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Budjan Galindji is a Ngunnawal language name meaning ‘water bird’ for the migratory Latham’s Snipe that visits the reserve from late August to February–March. Connectivity: The small patch of woodland in Budjan Galindji Grasslands is foraging habitat for Superb Parrots (Polytelis swainsonii) and used as a connection to nearby habitat. Natural values: Budjan Galindji Grasslands reserve protects: » patches of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland (approximately 20 per cent of the reserve) » a moderate population of endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) » one of only three known populations of the vulnerable Ginninderra Peppercress (Lepidium Ginninderrense) (the species has not been found outside the ACT) » a population of vulnerable Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) » the vulnerable Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea), a cryptic species, has been found in the reserve » wetland habitat for Latham’s Snipe (Gallinago hardwickii). Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreational activities, such as walking, are compatible with the reserve and slashed trails guide movement. Dogs, horses and cycling are prohibited. The grassland provides an opportunity to increase awareness of local conservation values through environmental and cultural educational activities. Community involvement: Friends of Grasslands (FOG) work to build community support for grassy ecosystem recovery and are involved in regular reserve maintenance activities. FOG has developed a Concept Plan for the site. Greening Australia has undertaken enhancement work within the reserve. Management: The area has a long history of stock grazing and as a result, vegetation condition is mixed, with higher quality areas scattered across the site. Long term management of the reserve aims to improve its overall ecological condition as well as improve wet gully areas and the condition of an ephemeral wetland to support frogs, insects and wetland bird species. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the area in accordance with the offset management plan (in preparation) » implement a site-specific biomass management regime to increase quality of existing Natural Temperate Grassland, Golden Sun Moth habitat, and Striped Legless Lizard habitat » improve the ecological condition of woodland areas to restore mid-storey shrub layer complexity for small bird habitat, and improve the condition of watercourses and wetland areas » incorporate community and stakeholder input, informing use and design of reserve infrastructure as part of a government/community co-design process. BRIAN PRINCE 162 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 163.
Crace Grasslands Nature Reserve Establishment: Crace Grasslands Nature Reserve (159 hectares) was gazetted in 1995. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Natural values: Crace Grasslands protects: » a large remnant of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland on the Crace Hill slopes (approximately 10% of the reserve) » large populations of vulnerable Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar), endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) and endangered Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides) » habitat of several other threatened or regionally uncommon plant species. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists one Aboriginal heritage site. Places of historic heritage interest include the remnants of James Cooper’s house (an early settler), indicated by mature exotic trees. Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreation activities using existing tracks are compatible with this reserve. Dogs are prohibited. Horse riding and cycling are permitted only on the identified equestrian trail. Access restrictions: A rural lease applies to the eastern third of the reserve. Public access to this area is prohibited without the permission of the lessee. The Belconnen Model Aero Club and Canberra Organic Growers Society community garden currently occupy small areas of the reserve, along with an ACT Government log storage area. Formal management arrangements have yet to be established with these organisations. Recreational users are not permitted in these areas. Community involvement: Friends of Grasslands works to build community support for grassy ecosystem recovery. Management: The reserve has a long history of grazing by stock. The long-term management aim is to conserve and rehabilitate habitat for rare and threatened plants and animals by increasing the extent and condition of native grasslands. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » implement a site-specific grazing, fire or slashing regime to increase habitat quality for Striped Legless Lizard and Golden Sun Moth » trial the use of reinstated surface rock as habitat for grassland lizards and invertebrates » trial restoration techniques in areas dominated by Phalaris grass » establish formal management arrangements with Belconnen Model Aero Club, the Canberra Organic Growers Society community garden and the ACT Government log storage area. ANDREW TATNELL 164 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 165.
Dunlop Grasslands Nature Reserve Establishment: Dunlop Grasslands Nature Reserve (103 hectares) was gazetted in 1997. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: Dunlop Grasslands, neighbouring grasslands in NSW and the nearby Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands Nature Reserve form a large, continuous grassland habitat for species such as the Golden Sun Moth. Connectivity is being improved by restoration activities. Natural values: Dunlop Grasslands protects: » a relatively large remnant of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland » a medium-sized population of endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) (the combined Dunlop Grasslands, Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands and NSW grasslands form one of the largest Golden Sun Moth habitat areas in the region) » a small patch (20 hectares) of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » one of a few known habitats of the rare and locally endemic Canberra Raspy Cricket (Cooraboorama canberrae) » a small population of Water Plantain (Alisma plantago-aquatica), a regionally rare plant. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists 11 Aboriginal heritage sites. One site contains glass artefacts, reflecting a period of rapid and dynamic change in the region’s history. Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreation activities using existing tracks are compatible with this reserve. Horse riding and cycling are permitted only on the Bicentennial National Trail, which crosses the reserve from east to west and runs along the southern edge. Dogs are prohibited. Access restrictions: Recreational use of the previous landfill site at the eastern end of the reserve is discouraged. Community involvement: Friends of Grasslands works to build community support for grassy ecosystem recovery. Management: The area has a long history of stock grazing and, as a result, vegetation condition in Dunlop Grasslands is mixed. Approximately ten hectares is dominated by exotic grasses and only a few areas have high native forb diversity. The long-term management aim is to conserve and rehabilitate native vegetation cover across the reserve and extend the area of Natural Temperate Grassland and habitat for Golden Sun Moth and Canberra Raspy Cricket. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » implement a site-specific grazing, fire or slashing regime to increase habitat quality for Golden Sun Moth » trial the use of reinstated surface rock as habitat for grassland lizards and invertebrates » trial restoration techniques in areas dominated by Phalaris grass. ANDREW TATNELL 166 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 167.
Gungaderra Grasslands Nature Reserve Establishment: Gungaderra Grasslands Nature Reserve (297 hectares) was gazetted in 1995 and extended in 2014 (environmental offset). The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Natural values: Gungaderra Grasslands protects: » a relatively large remnant of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland » the largest known population of the vulnerable Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) » a large population of the rare Key’s Matchstick Grasshopper (Keyacris scurra) » one of the few known locations of the vulnerable Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) » a small population of the endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) » several rare plant species » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (30 hectares) on Gungahlin Hill, providing important habitat for rare and threatened woodland birds. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists seven Aboriginal heritage sites. One site contains glass artefacts, reflecting a period of rapid and dynamic change in the region’s history. Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreation activities using existing tracks are compatible with this reserve. Dogs, horses and cycles are prohibited. Access restrictions: Recreational access to the National Transmission Station site at the corner of Barton Highway and Bellenden Street is not permitted. Community involvement: Friends of Grasslands works to build community support for grassy ecosystem recovery. Management: Gungaderra Grasslands has a long history of stock grazing. Plant diversity has been reduced but grassland structure and habitat have been maintained. Exotic grasses dominate along the creek line and in the old quarry area. The woodland on Gungahlin Hill is in relatively good condition. Management aims to increase the ecological condition and connectivity of Striped Legless Lizard, Golden Sun Moth and declining woodland bird habitat. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage offset area in accordance with the offset management plan » implement a site-specific grazing, fire or slashing regime to increase habitat quality for Striped Legless Lizard and Golden Sun Moth » trial the use of reinstated surface rock as habitat for grassland lizards and invertebrates » trial restoration techniques in areas dominated by Phalaris grass » trial habitat improvement works, including placement of woody debris and improvement plantings that restore the complexity of mid-storey shrub layer for small bird habitat. ANDREW TATNELL 168 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 169.
Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands Nature Reserve (part closed reserve) Establishment: Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands Nature Reserve (145 hectares) was established in 2016 as an environmental offset. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands, neighbouring grasslands in NSW and Dunlop Grasslands form a large continuous grassland habitat for species such as the Golden Sun Moth. Connectivity is being improved by restoration activities. Natural values: Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands protects: » the second largest recorded population of the endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) in the ACT (the combined NSW and Jarramlee/West MacGregor grasslands make the Golden Sun Moth habitat area one of the largest in the region) » patches of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland that form one of a few known habitats of the rare and locally endemic Canberra Raspy Cricket (Cooraboorama canberrae) » a small area of woodland and some pre-existing plantings—utilised by threatened and regionally declining woodland birds. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists 13 Aboriginal heritage sites. The ploughlands on the river flats are an historic place of interest. The highest point of the reserve, at 590 metres (Stony Knob), was used as a trig point by Percy Sheaffe and his team in February 1911 for the survey line between Mount Coree and One Tree Hill. Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreation activities using existing tracks are compatible with this reserve. Dogs and cycling are prohibited. The Bicentennial National Trail crosses the reserve on the north-eastern end. Horse riding is permitted only on identified equestrian trails. Access restrictions: West MacGregor is currently subject to a rural lease, and public access to the lease area is prohibited without the permission of the lessee. Subsidence has occurred in a small area on the southern boundary of Jarramlee (near West MacGregor). This part of the reserve has been declared closed (s. 259 of the Nature Conservation Act) and access is prohibited. Community involvement: Friends of Grasslands works to build community support for grassy ecosystem recovery. Management: Jarramlee/West MacGregor Grasslands Nature Reserve has a long history of stock grazing. Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana) dominates in some areas along creek lines and the majority of the Golden Sun Moth population occurs in these areas. (Chilean Needlegrass is closely related to the native grasses that the moth feeds on). Management of the reserve aims to increase the ecological condition and connectivity of habitat for Golden Sun Moth and declining woodland birds. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the area in accordance with the offset management plan. ANDREW TATNELL 170 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 171.
Mulanggari Grasslands Nature Reserve Establishment: Mulanggari Grasslands Nature Reserve (140 hectares) was established in 1995 and extended in 2014 (environmental offset). The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Natural values: Mulanggari Grasslands protects: » a relatively large remnant of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland, supporting small populations of several nationally and regionally rare or threatened plants » one of the largest known populations of the vulnerable Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) » a medium sized population of the endangered Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana), and one of a few known habitats of the vulnerable Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on the ridge tops in the west and north of the reserve » trees that have been a roosting site of the vulnerable Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists an Aboriginal chert quarry complex, valued by the Ngunnawal people and significant for the information it provides about Aboriginal technology, occupation and resource use. Evidence of 19th century pastoral use includes a small extractive pit and remnants of an old fence. Recreation: Only passive, low-impact recreation activities using existing access tracks are compatible with this reserve. Dogs, horses and cycling are prohibited. Community Involvement: Friends of Grasslands works to build community support for grassy ecosystem recovery. Management: Mulanggari Grasslands has a long history of stock grazing; approximately one third of the reserve is exotic pasture, one third is native pasture lacking in forb diversity, and one third is Natural Temperate Grassland. On ridge tops in the west and north the grasslands grade into partially cleared Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Management of Mulanggari Grasslands aims to increase the ecological condition and connectivity of the Natural Temperate Grassland and the habitat quality for Striped Legless Lizard, Golden Sun Moth and declining woodland birds. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the offset area in accordance with the offset management plan » protect the Aboriginal chert quarry complex from disturbance, support research and interpret (where appropriate) » implement a site-specific grazing, fire or slashing regime to increase habitat quality for Striped Legless Lizard and Golden Sun Moth » trial the use of reinstated surface rock as habitat for grassland lizards and invertebrates » trial restoration techniques in areas dominated by Phalaris grass. ANDREW TATNELL 172 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 173.
Sandstone Reserves Aranda Bushland, Black Mountain, Bruce Ridge, Gossan Hill, O’Connor Ridge and Percival Hill Nature Reserves Description This group of reserves west of Canberra’s CBD is underlain by Silurian Black Mountain Sandstone and related metasediments, resulting in a higher diversity of plant species than other areas of Canberra Nature Park. The reserves are generally well connected to one another and link with other areas of woodland and forest to provide a wildlife movement corridor through to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers. The sandstone reserves contain high conservation value woodland and forest communities, including box–gum and remnant Snow Gum Grassy Woodlands, transitioning to grassland. Areas of old-growth dry forest occur on Black Mountain. The woodlands and forests have high faunal diversity, support a high number of rare and threatened plant species, provide core habitat for rare and threatened woodland birds, and are a key component of the north–south migration route for honeyeaters. Black Mountain in particular is known for its richness and diversity of rare plants, including many species of orchid. The presence of numerous stone artefacts in the reserves provides physical evidence of the long history of Aboriginal occupation of the region. The Aboriginal ochre quarry on Gossan Hill was an important resource for Aboriginal people, who used the ochre for art and ceremony. Black Mountain is significant as a site used for corroborees and other gatherings. Recreational use of the reserves is high, particularly walking on Black Mountain and mountain biking on Bruce Ridge, where a number of multi-use tracks have been established. Lookouts on Black Mountain, including Telstra Tower, provide extensive scenic views over the city and to the mountains. The geological features of Gossan Hill attract visits from schools and other educational institutions. Dogs on leash are permitted on a track or trail in the majority of reserves but not on Black Mountain or in the Aranda Snow Gums area. Most of these reserves are surrounded by urban development, which must be protected from the risk of fire. Fire fuel reduction in Inner or Outer Asset Protection Zones adjacent to residential areas (which can be up to several hundred metres wide), reduces both the structure and diversity of vegetation. Future directions Management of these reserves will focus on protecting and conserving high conservation forest and woodlands and component rare plant species, some of which are endemic to this area. There is a need to improve understanding of the impact of fire on sandstone vegetation types, orchids and other rare species, to help manage ecological values and fire abatement zones. Monitoring and limiting the spread of Phytophthora is a priority in some areas. Strengthening linkages within and between component reserves in the sandstone complex and beyond to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee river corridors will support ecosystem function and resilience. The reserves will continue to accommodate a range of recreational facilities to provide opportunities and access for reserve users compatible with the conservation of natural and cultural values. Monitoring mountain biking and reviewing tracks will be important elements of managing recreational use of the reserves. Significant Aboriginal and historic cultural sites across this landscape reflect the historical layering of ancient culture and Canberra’s origins. Support for continuing Indigenous connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local-level actions to guide management. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and directions for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 174 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 175.
Aranda Bushland Nature Reserve Establishment: Aranda Bushland Nature Reserve (104 hectares) was established in 1993, and the Snow Gums area was protected as nature reserve in 2006 and managed as part of Aranda Bushland. The area is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive area of wooded vegetation that includes Black Mountain, O’Connor Ridge, Bruce Ridge, Mount Painter, and The Pinnacle nature reserves and provides a wildlife movement corridor through to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers. Natural values: Aranda Bushland protects: » important woodland bird habitat, including for threatened Speckled Warbler (Chthonicola sagittata), Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) and White Winged Triller (Lalage sueurii) » a high diversity of plants considered rare in the ACT, with significant populations of several species, including the Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) (on the ACT Heritage Register) » small areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Natural Temperate Grassland in the southern end of the reserve » the Snow Gum Grassy Woodland in the southern end of the reserve. This area, known as the Aranda Snow Gums area, is on the ACT Heritage Register as the best-preserved example of its type in and around the Canberra suburbs. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists seven Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Recreation: Aranda is heavily used by walkers, runners, and cyclists. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail in the main part of the reserve, but not in the Snow Gums area. Horses are prohibited. Community involvement: Friends of Aranda Bushland, established in 1990, is active in removing weeds, undertaking revegetation and monitoring and maintaining tracks in the reserve. The group’s Frost Hollow to Forest Walk and field guide Our Patch provide information on the ecological communities in the reserve. Management: The reserve has a relatively low weed cover following significant effort over many years by ParkCare and the Parks and Conservation Service. The long-term aim for the reserve is to conserve the forest–woodland–grassland complex and vegetation diversity. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain plant diversity and improve woodland condition and connectivity to other woodland areas » support Friends of Aranda Bushland’s restoration efforts in the Snow Gum Grassy Woodland. ANDREW TATNELL 176 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 177.
Black Mountain Nature Reserve Establishment: Black Mountain Nature Reserve (434 hectares) was established in 1970 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive area of wooded vegetation that includes Aranda Bushland, O’Connor Ridge, Bruce Ridge, Mount Painter and The Pinnacle nature reserves and provides a wildlife movement corridor through to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers. Natural values: Black Mountain protects: » sandstone geology that supports a rich shrub and herb diversity, providing habitat for more than 60 orchid species; approximately 40 nationally and regionally rare plant species are located here » a significant research and teaching site, and the location of important ecological studies into soil, fire, plant and animal ecology. Black Mountain is the type locality of many invertebrate species and some plants and geological formations. » several threatened and declining nomadic or migratory birds, including the Scarlet Robin (Petroica multicolor) and Gang-gang Cockatoo (Callocephalon fimbriatum), that regularly visit the reserve. » significant areas of old-growth dry forest. Cultural values: Black Mountain is significant place for Aboriginal people. It was the site of continued corroborees in historical times, and an important gathering place for Aboriginal groups travelling south into the mountains. It is a landmark in the ACT and a key feature in the design geometry of the National Capital. Historic heritage sites in the reserve include a small quarry used to provide stone for local buildings such as St John’s Anglican Church in Reid. The ACT Heritage Register lists 31 Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Recreation: The reserve is heavily used by walkers, runners and cyclists and for organised events. Several scenic lookouts, including Telstra Tower, provide views over Canberra. The Centenary Trail passes through the reserve. Dogs and horses are prohibited. Community involvement: Friends of Black Mountain, established in 2001, works to support reserve management. Management: Parts of Black Mountain have been impacted by utility infrastructure and maintenance, including an old tip site. The root-rot pathogen Phytophthora cinnamomi was identified in the reserve and in the neighbouring Australian National Botanic Gardens in the 1970s (Pratt 1973). The long-term management aim is to conserve the forest-woodland complex and its biodiversity. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain the reserve’s rich biodiversity, with a focus on orchid populations, old-growth forest, woodland condition and connectivity, and structural habitat for a range of species » review and improve signage, rationalise tracks and monitor increased recreation across the reserve » undertake action to avoid further spread of Phytophthora cinnamomi » continue to support the Friends of Black Mountain. ANDREW TATNELL 178 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 179.
Bruce Ridge Nature Reserve Establishment: Bruce Ridge Nature Reserve (98 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive area of wooded vegetation that includes Aranda Bushland, Black Mountain, O’Connor Ridge, Mount Painter and The Pinnacle nature reserves and provides a wildlife movement corridor through to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers. Natural values: Bruce Ridge protects: » part of the dry forest vegetation complex found on metasediments in the Black Mountain area that has high plant diversity and notable orchid species » open forest–woodland that is part of a wider landscape used by woodland species, including some threatened or regionally declining bird species » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on lower slopes. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists eight Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Recreation: Bruce Ridge is heavily used by walkers, runners and cyclists and for organised events. In the west of the reserve, a network of multi-use tracks has been established by the Parks and Conservation Service, working with Friends of Bruce Ridge. In developing the track network, a number of informal tracks were closed, parts of some tracks were re-routed, and stabilisation work was undertaken in order to avoid significant adverse impact on the reserve values. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses are prohibited. Community involvement: Friends of Bruce Ridge has been active since 2010 and works to support reserve management. Management: Bruce Ridge is a small reserve. It has a shrubby understorey, coarse woody litter and scattered small plants in the ground layer. Many of the orchid populations are relatively small. The area north-west of Gungahlin Drive is managed by the Parks and Conservation Service to complement the nature reserve values. The long-term management aim for the reserve is to conserve the forest–woodland complex and rare species. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain forest and woodland condition and connectivity to other habitat patches » continue to support Friends of Bruce Ridge to maintain the track network within the reserve. ANDREW TATNELL 180 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 181.
Gossan Hill Nature Reserve Establishment: Gossan Hill Nature Reserve (47 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is connected to Bruce Ridge Nature Reserve (separated by Haydon Drive) and then on to Black Mountain Nature Reserve (separated by Belconnen Way). Natural values: Gossan Hill protects: » a complex well-exposed geology that includes unusual geological features and exposures of educational value. Notable features include outcrops of gossan, a road cut on College Street, and exposures of very old Tertiary soil profiles » part of the dry forest vegetation complex found on metasediments in the Black Mountain area with high plant diversity and notable orchid species » open forest–woodland that is an important part of a wider landscape used by woodland species, including a few threatened or regionally declining bird species » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on the lower part of the reserve (based on volcanic geology). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists an Aboriginal ochre quarry, which is one of few known sites in the ACT and is highly valued by Aboriginal people. Historically, large gatherings were held here, with the ochre used for art and ceremony. It is reported that an Aboriginal pathway once connected Gossan Hill to another known ochre quarry in the suburb of Franklin. Several stone artefact scatters have been recorded in the reserve. Recreation: The reserve is heavily used by walkers, runners and cyclists. It is used as a geology teaching resource by several local educational institutions. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses are prohibited. Management: Gossan Hill is a small reserve with a large urban interface, and subject to intensive fire fuel management. Treasure Flower Daisy (Gazania linearis), an invasive weed species, has been found in the reserve. The long-term management aim is to conserve the forest–woodland complex and rare species. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain forest and woodland condition and connectivity to other habitat patches » manage the Aboriginal ochre quarry in consultation with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians » protect geological sites from disturbance » eradicate Treasure Flower Daisy from the reserve. ANDREW TATNELL 182 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 183.
O’Connor Ridge Nature Reserve Establishment: O’Connor Ridge Nature Reserve (57 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: O’Connor Ridge is part of an extensive area of wooded vegetation that includes Aranda Bushland, Black Mountain, Bruce Ridge, Mount Painter and The Pinnacle nature reserves and provides a wildlife movement corridor through to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers. Natural values: O’Connor Ridge protects: » a dry forest vegetation complex found on metasediments in the Black Mountain area that has a high plant diversity and many orchid species » open forest and woodland that is an important part of a wider landscape used by woodland species, including a few threatened or regionally declining bird species » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists four Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Recreation: O’Connor Ridge is heavily used by walkers, runners and cyclists. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses are prohibited. Access restrictions: Access to the old tip site in the northern part of the reserve is discouraged. Management: O’Connor Ridge is a small reserve close to suburban development. The northern part is highly disturbed and includes an old tip site, a pine windbreak, and native tree and wattle plantings. Weeds are widespread in these disturbed areas but are reasonably sparse within the dry open forest across the rest of the reserve. O’Connor Ridge has been impacted by a very high level of utility infrastructure. The long-term aim for the reserve is to rehabilitate the condition of native vegetation and to maintain connectivity values. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » consider opportunities to encourage additional recreational use of O’Connor Ridge in order to relieve pressure from Black Mountain (which has higher ecological values) » investigate the former tip site for contamination and rehabilitate if necessary. ANDREW TATNELL 184 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 185.
Percival Hill Nature Reserve Establishment: Percival Hill Nature Reserve (81 hectares) was established in 2006. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is connected to the broader landscape along the Ginninderra Creek corridor. Natural values: Percival Hill protects: » a large population of the endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) in dry forest on the western side. The area is also the habitat of the rare and restricted Black Mountain Donkey Orchid (Diuris nigromontana) » small areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on the lower slopes of the reserve » habitat of the vulnerable Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar) in grassland along Ginninderra Creek. Cultural values: Aboriginal Grinding Grooves within the reserve are listed on the ACT Heritage Register and stone artefact scatters have also been recorded. Recreation: A network of tracks across the reserve provides access for walkers and cyclists. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses are prohibited. Access restrictions: The reserve is one of a few areas in the ACT where the highly invasive weed species Spanish Heath (Erica lusitanica) has established. Access to the area of Spanish Heath infestation at the south-west end of the reserve is restricted to avoid spreading the weed. Management: Percival Hill is a small reserve and much of its area was previously cleared for stock grazing. Eucalypts were planted along the ridge line in the 1980s. Parts of Percival Hill have been impacted by utility infrastructure, and there is an extensive network of management vehicle trails. Stock grazing for fire management occurs on nearly 50% of the reserve. The long-term management aim is to conserve the Aboriginal grinding groove site, the Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, the large population of Hoary Sunray, and other rare plants. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » improve management of the axe-grinding grooves in consultation with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations » protect threatened and rare plants » protect Striped Legless Lizard habitat along Ginninderra Creek » eradicate Spanish Heath » control weeds in areas of native understorey. ANDREW TATNELL 186 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 187.
Connections with rivers Cooleman Ridge, McQuoids Hill, Mount Painter, Oakey Hill, The Pinnacle and Urambi Hills nature reserves. Description This group of reserves along the western edge of Canberra’s urban area is dominated by remnant dry forest transitioning to woodlands, including critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, and rocky grasslands. The reserves contribute to connectivity between other Canberra Nature Park reserves to the east and the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo rivers to the west. The reserves support significant populations of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) and provide habitat for the Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) and landscape connectivity for woodland birds. They support populations of rare and threatened plants, including the vulnerable Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida). The presence of stone artefacts throughout the reserves provides physical evidence of the long history of Aboriginal occupation of the region. Aboriginal and historic cultural sites across this landscape reflect the historical layering of ancient culture and Canberra’s origins. The reserves have a high level of recreational use and an extensive network of management trails and walking tracks. The Bicentennial National Trail passes through, or is adjacent to, all the reserves in this group. Dogs are permitted on leash, on a track or trail in all reserves in this complex, with the exception of McQuoids Hill. Future directions Management of these reserves will focus on restoring woodland communities to promote ecological function and to strengthen links across the landscape with adjacent woodlands and to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers. Conserving and improving habitat for Pink-tailed Worm-lizard is a priority that may require management of vegetation in rocky grasslands to ensure the ongoing viability of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard populations. Measures may be required to protect reserves from encroachment of invasive grasses from surrounding urban areas, and grazing pressure from kangaroos and rabbits needs to be effectively managed. The reserves will continue to accommodate a range of recreational activities that are compatible with the maintenance of natural and cultural values. Monitoring informal recreational use will be an important element of reserve management. Historic heritage sites will be protected and, where appropriate, interpreted. Support for continuing Aboriginal connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local-level actions to guide management. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and directions for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 188 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 189.
Cooleman Ridge Nature Reserve Establishment: Cooleman Ridge Nature Reserve (187 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of linked woodland to the north of the Tuggeranong Valley that also includes Mount Taylor, Farrer Ridge and Wanniassa Hills nature reserves to the east and the Murrumbidgee River to the west. Natural values: Cooleman Ridge protects: » rocky areas that support a large population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » several small patches of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, with some regionally rare plants present in the understorey » remnant and regenerating woodland that, together with its high connectivity value, provides important habitat for woodland birds. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists two Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Recreation: Cooleman Ridge has high recreational use including walking, running, cycling, dog walking, horse riding and bouldering. The Centenary Trail and Bicentennial National Trail pass through the reserve. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horse riding is permitted only on identified equestrian trails. Community involvement: Cooleman Ridge ParkCare group undertakes activities that include control of invasive weeds, woodland restoration, distribution of nature trail pamphlets and mapping of rabbit burrows. Management: The area was grazed by stock as part of the ‘Yarralumla’ pastoral property. Over the last few decades, the reserve has been restored from a mixture of exotic and low-diversity native pasture (with high weed cover) to an area of regenerating woodland. The long-term management aim is to conserve and rehabilitate Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat and rare plant populations, to continue rehabilitation of woodland, and to maintain connectivity. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » protect and improve Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat in accordance with the Action Plan for the species (ACT Government 2017d) » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve, and connectivity to other woodland areas » investigate options to improve groundcover diversity » improve habitat for declining woodland birds » develop the walking track network on Mount Arawang » continue to support Cooleman Ridge ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 190 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 191.
McQuoids Hill Nature Reserve Establishment: McQuoids Hill Nature Reserve (56 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is close to Cooleman Ridge Nature Reserve and the Murrumbidgee River, separated by horse paddocks and rural land. Though small, the reserve is important in supporting wildlife movement from nature reserves to the east (Mount Taylor, Farrer Ridge and Wanniassa Hills) through to the Murrumbidgee River. Natural values: McQuoids Hill protects: » rocky areas that support the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, with a few regionally rare plants present in the understorey » a small patch of vulnerable Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida) » part of a forested area that is a key connection to the Murrumbidgee River and important for wildlife movement » regenerating and remnant woodland that, together with high connectivity value, provides habitat for threatened and declining woodland birds » the vulnerable Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides) which has been recorded as breeding within the reserve, however, there are no recent records. Recreation: The Bicentennial National Trail passes through the western side of the reserve. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Dogs are prohibited. Management: Pastoral settlement of the Tuggeranong district dates back to the 1820s, and the McQuoids Hill area has primarily been used for stock grazing. Much of the reserve protects box–gum woodland with a grass and shrub understorey. The north-eastern slopes have been cleared of trees, with native perennial grasses largely retained but sparse. Much of the rocky grassland to the south-west is covered in dense exotic grasses. The long-term management aim is to conserve and improve Pink-tailed Worm-lizard and woodland bird habitat, and to maintain connectivity value. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas » map the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. ANDREW TATNELL 192 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 193.
Mount Painter Nature Reserve Establishment: Mount Painter Nature Reserve (93 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is a key component in an extensive landscape of remnant woodland vegetation extending from Black Mountain and O’Connor Ridge in the east to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers in the west. Natural values: Mount Painter protects: » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » habitat of several plants that are rare in the ACT » the ‘Wildflower Triangle’ (approximately 10 hectares) behind the suburb of Cook, which has high habitat value for woodland birds and a high diversity of plants, including several rare species » the vulnerable Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) has been recorded in the reserve. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists one Aboriginal heritage site within the reserve. The remnant of a hut belonging to early settler Roderick McDonald is located close to the reserve boundary in the adjacent horse paddock. Recreation: The Bicentennial National Trail passes along the northern edge of the reserve and through the Wildflower Triangle in the eastern section. Horse riding is permitted on this trail and the identified equestrian trail on the eastern perimeter of the main section of the reserve. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Cycling is permitted only on management trails and sealed cycle paths. Community involvement: Friends of Mount Painter has been active since 1989, with regular activities that include weed and erosion control, planting trees and shrubs, mapping rabbit burrows and counting the kangaroo population. Management: Mount Painter has been grazed since pastoral settlement in the 1830s and is substantially cleared of native trees and understorey vegetation. Heavy grazing pressure has resulted in erosion of the shallow, infertile soils on the steeper slopes and in gullies. Erosion control works have been undertaken. Mount Painter has been subject to much recent weed control, and the dominant ground cover species are moving from thistle and exotic annual grasses to native grasses. There have been several attempts to restore the native tree and shrub layer, with varying degrees of success. The long-term management aim is to conserve the Wildflower Triangle and rehabilitate the woodland and open- forest vegetation to strengthen its value as habitat, and as part of a significant wildlife movement corridor. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » protect and improve the Wildflower Triangle and existing box–gum woodland » maintain and supplement revegetation plantings to improve the condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve, and connectivity to other woodland areas » continue to undertake measures to promote ground cover » continue to support the Friends of Mount Painter ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 194 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 195.
Oakey Hill Nature Reserve Establishment: Oakey Hill Nature Reserve (65 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is linked to Mount Taylor and is part of a wider woodland complex with connection west to the Murrumbidgee River. It is part of a woodland landscape used by threatened and regionally declining woodland birds and other woodland fauna. Natural values: Oakey Hill protects: » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in the south-east and north-west of the reserve, and four plant species considered rare in the ACT » a population of vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » a stand of Black Cypress Pine (Callitris endlicheri) » part of the Tuggeranong Parkway Road Cutting, a significant ACT geological site, valued for scientific study and teaching purposes. Recreation: Oakey Hill is popular for walking, running and cycling. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horse riding is permitted on the identified equestrian trail along the eastern boundary of the reserve. Community involvement: Oakey Hill ParkCare, established in 2003, undertakes activities such as weed control, gully and track restoration, and collecting Bird Atlas information. Management: Oakey Hill is a small reserve with a long history of grazing by stock. The long-term management aim is to rehabilitate native vegetation and to conserve woodland connectivity and Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » improve the extent and diversity of native woodland vegetation » identify and map the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat » continue to support Oakey Hill ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 196 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 197.
The Pinnacle Nature Reserve Establishment: The Pinnacle Nature Reserve (154 hectares) was established in 1993 and extended in 2016 (environmental offset). The reserve is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is a key link in an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation stretching from Black Mountain and Bruce and O’Connor ridges in the east to the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers in the west. Natural values: The Pinnacle protects: » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, and habitat of a few plants that are rare in the ACT » habitat of several threatened and declining woodland birds, and is an important link for the regional movement of woodland birds » habitat of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists five Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Recreation: The reserve is popular for walking and running. The Bicentennial National Trail passes through the reserve, along the northern and southern boundaries. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horse riding is permitted only on identified equestrian trails. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Community involvement: Friends of The Pinnacle undertakes regular activities that include weed and erosion control, rabbit and kangaroo monitoring, and guided walks. The group is trialling a range of treatments aimed at increasing native grass and herbaceous species. Management: The Pinnacle has been substantially cleared and modified, but the area of moderate to good understorey has expanded in recent years. Over 4000 trees and shrubs were planted on the reserve through government employment schemes in the mid-1980s. Many of these species are not endemic to the area. The long-term management aim is to conserve bird habitat, vegetation condition and wildlife connectivity, and to conserve Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the offset area in accordance with the offset management plan » maintain plant diversity » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas » maintain Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat » continue to support Friends of The Pinnacle ParkCare group. ANDREW TATNELL 198 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 199.
Urambi Hills Nature Reserve Establishment: Urambi Hills Nature Reserve (246 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is connected to the Murrumbidgee River and Brindabella Mountains via Bullen Range to the west, and McQuoids Hill and Cooleman Ridge nature reserves to the north. Natural values: Urambi Hills protects: » rocky areas that support a large population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland over about 60 per cent of its area (though much of that community is in a poor to moderate condition) » habitat for threatened and declining woodland birds moving through the landscape. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists three Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. The remnant of an old building on the north bank of Tuggeranong Creek, at the western end of the reserve, is evidence of earlier farming activity. Recreation: The reserve is used for walking, running and cycling. Horse riding is permitted on the Bicentennial National Trail, which passes through the reserve along the northern boundary. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Access restrictions: A small area of land in the west of the reserve is under rural lease and public access is prohibited without the permission of the lessee. Community Involvement: Friends of Urambi Hills undertakes activities in the reserve. Management: The majority of the reserve has been cleared of trees and has a long history of stock grazing. The groundcover is a mix of native and exotic species. Rocky areas have a high diversity of native groundcover species and are habitat for the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard. The long-term management aim is to maintain and improve Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat and woodland condition and connectivity. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » continue habitat improvement work with a focus on structure, including placement of woody debris and replacement of exotic shrubs with native shrub species that provide habitat for woodland birds » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of targeted woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas » protect and improve Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat in accordance with the Action Plan for the species (ACT Government 2017d) » continue to support Urambi Hills ParkCare group. ANDREW TATNELL 200 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 201.
Kowen Escarpment and Molonglo Gorge Kowen Escarpment and Molonglo Gorge nature reserves Description These reserves are part of a significant regional wildlife corridor that follows the uplifted land along the Queanbeyan fault and connects woodland and open forest in the vicinity of Googong Dam with woodlands in the north of the ACT and surrounding NSW, and links to the Southern Flyway—a connection of woodland vegetation across the southern slopes and central west of NSW and the ACT. The reserves support remnant patches of Snow Gum (Eucalyptus pauciflora) and significant populations of rare plants. The forested slopes of Kowen Escarpment are too steep for pastoral or plantation activity, and the area is relatively isolated from suburban areas; consequently, vegetation on the reserve is in relatively good condition and supports many rare and threatened plant species. The dramatic landscape of Molonglo Gorge has high aesthetic value and provides an outstanding opportunity to study the characteristics and structure of bedded sediments. Part of the reserve supports critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. The presence of numerous stone artefacts in the reserves provides physical evidence of the long history of Aboriginal occupation of the region. Molonglo Gorge and the Burbong area are of special significance to Aboriginal people, and the area is known to be a major Aboriginal pathway south into alpine areas. Several historic heritage sites are located partially within the reserve. The reserves accommodate a range of recreational opportunities and access for reserve users. Walking and picnicking is popular in Molonglo Gorge, particularly along the river, while Kowen Escarpment has a history of higher impact activities, including four-wheel driving and trail bike riding. Future directions Management of these reserves will focus on protecting and conserving high conservation value forest and woodland communities, rare plant species, geological values and cultural values. There is a need to: assess native woodland and forest communities to better understand and protect reserve values; protect natural and cultural values from high impact recreation activities and inappropriate fire regimes; and protect and restore linkages to surrounding woodlands and forest. Protecting and maintaining populations of rare plants is a priority. While the reserves will continue to accommodate a range of recreational facilities, a review of recreational activities will be undertaken to ensure that recreation is compatible with the maintenance of natural and cultural values into the future. High impact recreational activities will be phased out and recreation compatible with the protection of the natural and cultural values will be promoted. Recreational facilities in the reserves will be upgraded where required. Historic heritage sites will be protected and, where appropriate, interpreted. Support for continuing Aboriginal connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local-level management intent specific to each reserve. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform the land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and directions for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 202 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 203.
Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve Establishment: Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve (466 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: Kowen Escarpment is part of a significant regional wildlife corridor that follows the uplifted land along the Queanbeyan fault, connects woodland and open forest in the vicinity of Googong Dam with woodlands in the north of the ACT and surrounding NSW, and links to the Southern Flyway—a connection of woodland vegetation across the ACT and the southern slopes and central west of NSW. Natural values: Kowen Escarpment protects: » an important wildlife corridor of forested, uplifted land along the Queanbeyan Fault that is used by a number of threatened woodland bird species » small populations of critically endangered Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis), endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) and vulnerable Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida) and provides habitat for four rare species » a small area of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » a sparse population of the vulnerable Koala (Phascolarctos cinereus) (recorded in the wider Kowen-Majura Training Area) contributing to the maintenance/local movement of the Koala population. Cultural values: Under previous management arrangements several Aboriginal stone artefacts were recorded within the reserve and removed. Recreation: The reserve has a long history of recreational use that is not appropriate in a nature reserve; for example, four-wheel driving, motor biking and pig hunting. Illegal vehicle use has caused erosion and creek sedimentation, and off-road motorcycles have impacted significant plants. Limited bushwalking and bird watching occurs along forest tracks. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. The adjacent pine plantations are popular for motor sports. Horses are prohibited. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Access restrictions: A small area of land in the south-west of the reserve is under rural lease. Public access to this area is prohibited without the permission of the lessee. Management: Kowen Escarpment is a steep forested ridge with slopes in excess of 25 degrees. Pastoral settlement on the adjacent Kowen plateau began in 1831 and pine plantations were established in 1927. Pine wildings have spread into the reserve from the adjacent pine plantations. Prescribed burns are regularly undertaken within the reserve to protect the pine plantation from wildfire. The long-term management aim is to protect connectivity values, and populations of significant plants. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the spread of pine wildings » prohibit off-track motorised vehicle use » avoid motorised vehicle use on-track (except for possible approval when required for approved 4WD training or to provide safe connection between areas of the broader Kowen Forest during an event) » increase measures to restrict illegal access and use of the reserve. ANDREW TATNELL 204 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 205.
Molonglo Gorge Nature Reserve Establishment: Molonglo Gorge Nature Reserve (506 hectares) was established in 1972. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of a significant regional wildlife corridor that follows the uplifted land along the Queanbeyan fault, connects woodland and open forest in the vicinity of Googong Dam with woodlands in the north of the ACT and surrounding NSW, and links to the Southern Flyway—a connection of woodland vegetation across the ACT and southern slopes and central west of NSW. Natural values: Molonglo Gorge protects: » part of a regionally important wildlife corridor of forested uplifted land along the Queanbeyan Fault that is used by a number of threatened woodland bird species » 40 hectares of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on river flats and lower slopes » an outstanding regional locality to study the characteristics and structure of bedded sediments » a dramatic landscape of aesthetic significance. Cultural values: Molonglo Gorge and the Burbong area hold a special association for Aboriginal people as a major traditional pathway south into alpine areas. The ACT Heritage Register lists two Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve, and surveys in adjacent areas indicate that more are likely to be present. The Kowen Cultural Precinct, listed on the ACT Heritage Register, includes several historic sites adjacent to or partially within the reserve, including homesteads, the village of Burbong and the old road (and river ford) leading to the Kowen Public School. Recreation: Molonglo Gorge has a popular picnic site with a large parking area, toilets, playground, and a walking track along the river. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses and cycling are prohibited. Trout fishing is permitted. Access restrictions: A small section (~2.8 ha) area at the upstream end of the reserve is subject to a rural lease. Access to this area is prohibited except for the lessee, and a person authorised by the lessee. Management: There is a long history of sheep grazing in the vicinity of Molonglo Gorge from the 1830s. Small‑scale gold mining operations occurred in the 1880s, and pine plantations were established from 1927. The collapse of waste spoil dumps at the Captain Flat mine in 1939, 1942 and 1945 released large quantities of heavy metals into the Molonglo River, and concentrations of these pollutants remain high in river sediments. The long-term management aim is to conserve habitat, vegetation communities and rare plants, and develop recreation facilities. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » prohibit off-track motorised vehicle use and phase out recreational use of motorised vehicles on-track » increase measures to restrict illegal access and use of the reserve » maintain picnic and adventure play facilities at Molonglo Gorge recreation area » avoid disturbing polluted sediments in the Molonglo River » investigate management required for heritage sites. ANDREW TATNELL 206 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 207.
Woden Woodlands and Grasslands Callum Brae, Farrer Ridge, Isaacs Ridge, Jerrabomberra West, Mount Mugga Mugga, Mount Taylor, Red Hill and Wanniassa Hills nature reserves. Description The Woden Woodlands and Grasslands complex encompasses a large area of continuous, high-quality critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum woodland, part of one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse areas of box–gum woodland remaining in Australia. The woodlands transition to dry sclerophyll forest on the hill tops, and merge into large areas of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland on the Jerrabomberra Valley floor, with links to NSW. The reserves provide important habitat for wildlife and a movement corridor along the wooded ridges to the south and west, connecting with the Murrumbidgee River. Reserves in the Woden Woodlands and Grasslands complex are generally in good condition, supporting areas with good ground cover diversity, including threatened and rare plant species, as well as habitat for a variety of animal species. The reserves are particularly known for their diversity of woodland birds and grassland reptiles. The presence of stone artefacts and culturally modified trees indicates a long history of Aboriginal occupation in the valley and surrounding hills. Layered with this history are more recent historic sites, including pastoral buildings, evidence of solider settlement lease blocks on the neighbouring Callum Brae private lease, and early 20th century plantings in a number of reserves, initiated under Burley Griffin’s plan for reforesting denuded hills and ridges. Most of the woodland reserves in this complex have high levels of recreational use, with a network of management trails and other tracks, including parts of the Centenary Trail. Walking tracks with interpretive signs and lookout points provide the visitor with information and panoramic views. Only low-impact, passive recreational activities are compatible with values in the grasslands reserves and Callum Brae, and dogs are not permitted in these areas. Future directions In the last decade, surveys have shown an overall improvement in the condition of woodlands, from moderately modified towards partially modified, across much of this complex. The area under protection has been extended, with the addition of Callum Brae and Jerrabomberra West nature reserves. Future additions of reserves to this complex from environmental offsets are expected to increase the area of endangered ecological communities under protection, provide further protected habitat for a number of threatened and declining plant and animal species, and build resilience in the landscape. Management focus will be on the continual improvement of the condition of Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Natural Temperate Grassland and increasing and/or improving habitat for threatened species and declining woodland birds. Historic heritage sites will be protected and, where appropriate, interpreted. Support for continuing Aboriginal connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local level actions to guide management. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and directions for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 208 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 209.
Callum Brae Nature Reserve Establishment: Callum Brae Nature Reserve (143 hectares) was established in 2008. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Callum Brae protects: » part of one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland remaining in Australia » high-quality breeding and foraging habitat for woodland birds, including threatened or regionally declining species: Diamond Firetail (Stagonopleura guttata), White Winged Triller (Lalage sueruii), Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) and Southern Whiteface (Aphelocephala leucopsis) » good habitat for small numbers of Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang) and Flame Robin (Petroica phoenicea), especially in autumn and winter, and seasonal visits from the Dusky Woodswallow (Artamus cyanopterus) » habitat of the vulnerable Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea), one of few known locations. Cultural values: The reserve has a long history of pastoral use and protects part of the ACT Heritage Register listed ‘Callum Brae’ precinct, an outstanding ACT example of a Federal Capital Territory soldier settlement rural lease. Three small red brick huts on the western border of the reserve were built to store munitions for use at the adjacent quarry. Recreation: The reserve has several pedestrian access points and a network of slashed management trails for low key recreation. Dogs and horses are prohibited. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Community Involvement: Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the reserve since 1998 as part of a long-term woodland bird monitoring program across grassy woodlands. Management: The reserve has previously been grazed by stock. It has no shared boundaries with suburbs. The long-term management aim is to conserve and rehabilitate the structure and condition of vegetation and to maintain connectivity with other woodland areas to ensure there is ongoing viable habitat for threatened and declining woodland birds. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » continue habitat improvement works, including placement of woody debris and plantings to reduce erosion and restore the complexity of mid-storey shrub layer for small bird habitat » maintain connectivity with other woodland areas » investigate dieback in Blakely’s Red Gum » protect the historic munitions stores. ANDREW TATNELL 210 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 211.
Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve Establishment: Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve (185 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Farrer Ridge protects: » grassy woodland with a diverse, high-quality understorey that provides habitat for rare plant species, including Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans). The endangered Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) was recorded in the reserve in 2005 and 2008 but has not been observed recently. » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland over about one third of the area » rocky areas that provide habitat for the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists three Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. The remnants of a cottage (Grady’s house) are located on the western side. Recreation: The reserve is popular for walking, running and cycling, including group events. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Community involvement: Farrer Ridge ParkCare, established in 1989, undertakes weed and erosion control, interpretive walks, vegetation mapping, and propagation of native plants from local seed. Management: Farrer Ridge was extensively burnt in 2003 with a high tree mortality. Significant regeneration is now occurring, from lignotubers rather than from the recovery of mature trees. The long-term management aim for the reserve is to conserve native plant diversity, including populations of rare plants, and to maintain connectivity with other woodland areas. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain plant diversity » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas » improve habitat for Pink-tailed Worm-lizard in accordance with the Action Plan for the species (ACT Government 2017d) » continue to support Farrer Ridge ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 212 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 213.
Isaacs Ridge Nature Reserve Establishment: Isaacs Ridge Nature Reserve (387 hectares) was established in 1993 and extended in 2012 and 2014 (environmental offset). The reserve is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. A small special purpose reserve adjacent to the western side is managed as part of Canberra Nature Park. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Isaacs Ridge protects: » an important part of one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland remaining in Australia » an important breeding and foraging habitat for woodland birds, and recent plantings of Drooping She- oak (Allocasuarina verticillata) aim to restore foraging habitat for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) » habitat (a small area) for the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » one of three known ACT locations for the semi-aquatic Small Knotweed (Polygonum plebeium). » The Wedge-tailed Eagle (Aquila audax) nests in the reserve. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists one Aboriginal heritage site within the reserve. Recreation: Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail, except in the offset area. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Part of the Centenary Trail passes along the western edge. The special purpose reserve and adjacent pine forest are a focus for recreational use with a network of multi-use tracks. Cycling is permitted only on management trails and the Centenary Trail. Access restrictions: Access to the former tip site in the south-west corner of the reserve is discouraged. Community Involvement: Isaacs Ridge/Mount Mugga Mugga ParkCare undertakes revegetation and weed control. Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the offset area since 1998. Management: Isaacs Ridge has steep slopes and shallow infertile soils that are susceptible to erosion. The reserve has previously been extensively cleared and grazed by stock. Two pine plantations border the reserve on the western side. The 39 hectare offset area of woodland on the eastern side of the reserve requires specific management under an offset management plan. The long-term management aim for the reserve is to extend the area of woodland and to rehabilitate its condition and structure. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the offset area in accordance with the offset management plan » maintain plant diversity, extend woodland areas within the reserve, improve woodland condition and maintain connectivity to other woodland areas » maintain the wet gully at the southern end of the reserve as a drought refuge for woodland birds » map the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat » continue support for Isaacs Ridge/Mount Mugga Mugga ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 214 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 215.
Jerrabomberra West Grasslands Nature Reserve Establishment: Jerrabomberra West Grasslands Nature Reserve (261 hectares) was established in 2007. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: This reserve is part of a large grassland–woodland complex of more than 1000 hectares that has one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse box–gum woodland areas remaining in Australia. Natural values: Jerrabomberra West Grasslands protects: » one of the largest ACT areas of critically endangered Natural Temperate Grassland (180 hectares) and critically endangered Yellow Box–Red-Gum Grassy Woodland » habitat for the endangered Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata), one of three reserves nationally in which the ‘northern’ form of the lizard is known to occur » populations of three other threatened species: Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar), Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) and Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea); and a diverse reptile habitat » habitat for small numbers of threatened Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang) and Flame Robin (Petroica phoenicea), particularly in autumn and winter, and the rare Dusky Woodswallow (Artamus cyanopterus) and Diamond Firetail (Stagonopleura guttata), which breed in the reserve » habitat for rare plant species » one of the few known locations of the rare and locally endemic Canberra Raspy Cricket (Cooraboorama canberrae) and open rocky areas within the woodland that are likely habitat of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists four Aboriginal heritage sites. The reserve also protects part of two heritage listed sites: the Callum Brae Precinct and the Woden Homestead and Environs. Recreation: Access to the reserve is from Callum Brae Nature Reserve and a network of slashed management trails. The National Recovery Plan for the Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata) requires restricted access and limited visitor use. Only passive, low-impact recreation activities are compatible with maintaining reserve values. Dogs, horses and cycling are prohibited. Community involvement: Canberra Ornithologists Group has conducted seasonal monitoring at sites in the woodlands since 2005. Friends of Grasslands advocates for grasslands conservation. Management: Jerrabomberra West management aims to increase the ecological condition and connectivity of the Natural Temperate Grassland and Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland community, with a focus on the habitats of Grassland Earless Dragon and declining woodland birds. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » implement a site-specific grazing, fire or slashing regime to increase habitat quality for Grassland Earless Dragon, Striped Legless Lizard and Golden Sun Moth » trial the use of reinstated surface rock as habitat for grassland lizards and invertebrates and a restoration technique in areas dominated by Phalaris » continue habitat improvement works, including plantings, to restore mid-storey shrub layer complexity for small bird habitat. ANDREW TATNELL 216 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 217.
Mount Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve Establishment: Mount Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve (148 hectares) was established in 1993, with an addition in 2005, and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Mount Mugga Mugga protects: » part of one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland remaining in Australia » important breeding and foraging habitat for woodland birds, including threatened species Diamond Firetail (Stagonopleura guttata), Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata) and Speckled Warbler (Chthonicola sagittata) » habitat for vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) and Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea). » The vulnerable Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides) has been recorded as breeding within the reserve, but there are no recent records. » Wedge-tailed Eagles (Aquila audax) nest on the eastern slopes. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register identifies a number of Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve. Early 20th century plantings (initiated by Walter Burley Griffin, supervised by Charles Weston) continue to flourish. Species include Argyle Apple (Eucalyptus cinerea), White Box (Eucalyptus albens) and Golden Wattle (Acacia pycnantha). Recreation: The Centenary Trail passes through the reserve. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Cycling is permitted only on management trails and the Centenary Trail. Horses are prohibited. Community Involvement: Isaacs Ridge/Mount Mugga Mugga ParkCare undertakes regular activities including planting and weed control. Management: The long-term management aim is to conserve the existing significant woodland bird habitat and historic plantings, rehabilitate vegetation structure, and support connectivity to other woodland areas. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » improve woodland structure to support woodland bird habitat and connectivity to other woodland areas » investigate options for remediation of significant gullies » continue to support Isaacs Ridge/Mount Mugga Mugga ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 218 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 219.
Mount Taylor Nature Reserve Establishment: Mount Taylor Nature Reserve (300 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Mount Taylor protects: » a diverse high-quality woodland complex which protects the largest and heritage listed ACT population of the endangered Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) (approximately 10% of the national population) and provides habitat for plant species rare in the ACT » important habitat for threatened and regionally declining woodland birds » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland on the western slopes » a large population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » the geologically significant Tuggeranong Parkway Cutting, which is on the ACT Heritage Register. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists two Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve, including a culturally modified tree. Recreation: Mount Taylor is popular for walking, running and cycling. A walking track leads to the summit. Horse riding is permitted on identified equestrian trails. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Cycling is permitted only on management trails, sealed roads and signposted trails. Community involvement: Mount Taylor ParkCare, established in 1989, undertakes activities that include weed control, monitoring kangaroo numbers, stabilising erosion, and collecting Bird Atlas information. Management: Mount Taylor was extensively cleared and grazed in the past, but significant regeneration has now occurred; all vegetation layers (trees, shrubs and ground cover) exhibit good structure and diversity. Large areas of Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata) are beginning to mature and will, in future, provide a food source for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami). The long-term management aim is to support forest and woodland regeneration and to protect threatened species. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas » improve habitat and connectivity for declining woodland birds » protect, improve and monitor Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat in accordance with the Action Plan for the species (ACT Government 2017d) » maintain groundcover, monitor grazing pressure and connect high-quality Small Purple Pea habitat » upgrade and maintain the walking track network » continue to support Mount Taylor ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 220 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 221.
Red Hill Nature Reserve Establishment: Red Hill Nature Reserve (293 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Red Hill protects: » part of one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland in Australia » the fifth largest known population of the endangered Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides) (on the ACT Heritage Register) and major ACT habitat of the rare Pale Flax Lily (Dianella longifolia) » habitat of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) and Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) » a nesting site for the Gang-gang Cockatoo (Callocephalon fimbriatum), listed as vulnerable in NSW. Cultural values: Burley Griffin’s vision of hills with colourful flowering vegetation was implemented by Charles Weston with non-endemic species planted from 1917 to 1920. Plantings of Crimson Bottlebrush (Callistemon citrinus), Rosemary Grevillea (Grevillea rosmarinifolia) and Darling Pea (Swainsona galegifolia) remain today and are listed in the ACT Heritage Register Recreation: The reserve is popular for walking, running, cycling, and group events. Scenic lookouts provide views over Canberra’s Parliamentary Zone to the mountains beyond. Dogs are permitted on leash and on a track or trail. Cycling is permitted only on management trails and the Centenary Trail. Access restrictions: Access to the old tip site at the western end of the reserve is discouraged. Community involvement: Red Hill Regenerators volunteer group, established in 1988, undertakes activities that include removing weeds, rationalising tracks, planting forbs and shrubs, guiding walks and mapping rabbit warrens. The Regenerators have helped to significantly reduce weed cover since 1995. The Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the reserve since 1998. Management: Red Hill has a long history of stock grazing. Cattle were removed from the reserve in 1995. Past grazing and weed invasion from neighbouring gardens have modified the original vegetation. The long-term management aim is to conserve native plant diversity and populations of rare plants. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » improve woodland condition and maintain connectivity to other woodland areas » improve habitat for threatened and declining woodland bird species » maintain Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat » investigate options for improving Gang-gang Cockatoo habitat and protect known breeding trees » remediate the former tip site » continue to support Red Hill Regenerators. ANDREW TATNELL 222 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 223.
Wanniassa Hills Nature Reserve Establishment: Wanniassa Hills Nature Reserve (262 hectares) was established in 1993 and is a Designated Area under the National Capital Plan. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is part of an extensive landscape of remnant wooded vegetation that provides a wildlife movement corridor through to NSW in the east, to the Murrumbidgee River in the west, and to the southern ACT through Tuggeranong Hill and Rob Roy nature reserves. Natural values: Wanniassa Hills protects: » a high diversity of open forest and woodland plant species including several that are uncommon in the ACT » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (on about 15% of the reserve) » connectivity between large woodland areas in Woden and Tuggeranong, and to forest and woodland areas in NSW » important habitat for threatened and regionally declining woodland birds (because of high condition vegetation and connectivity) » a population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) in rocky areas. » The Wedge-tailed Eagle (Aquila audax) nests in the reserve. Recreation: The reserve is popular for walking, running and cycling. The Centenary Trail passes through the north- eastern corner of the reserve. Horse riding is permitted on a section of identified equestrian trail, which passes along the eastern section of the northern boundary. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Cycling is permitted only on management trails and the Centenary Trail. Management: Wanniassa Hills has both high-quality open forest and heavily disturbed former grazing land. The long-term management aim is to support forest and woodland regeneration and to protect rare species. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » survey for Pink-tailed Worm-lizard and map extent of habitat » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas. ANDREW TATNELL 224 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 225.
Southern Hills Melrose, Rob Roy and Tuggeranong Hill nature reserves Description This group of reserves in southern Canberra includes large areas of dry forest and woodland, with links west to Namadgi National Park and the Murrumbidgee River, and east to woodland and forest in NSW in the vicinity of Googong Foreshores and the Tinderry Nature Reserve. The reserves provide important habitat for woodland birds and an important corridor for wildlife movement across the landscape and a key east–west honeyeater migration route. The Southern Hills support areas of critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata) open forest, including some old-growth forest. The stands of Allocasuarina are a food source for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami). The isolation of much of the southern areas from the urban fringe means these areas are more likely to support populations of small mammals. Widespread populations of the nationally vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) occur in the reserves, as well as a number of rare plant species. The presence of numerous stone artefacts in the reserves provides physical evidence of the long history of Aboriginal occupation of the region. The stone-axe grinding groove site in Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve is highly valued by the Ngunnawal people, and is significant for the information it provides on Aboriginal technology, occupation and resource use. While there are pedestrian access points and a management trail on Tuggeranong Hill, access to Melrose and Rob Roy reserves is limited, and recreational use is low because they are relatively remote from suburban development. Dogs are not permitted in Melrose or Rob Roy nature reserves. Future directions Management of the southern woodlands will focus on protecting and restoring linkages to surrounding woodlands, the Murrumbidgee River and south to the alpine region. Continual improvement of woodland condition and protection of rare plants will be a focus, particularly in Melrose Nature Reserve, as well as the conservation of Glossy Black-cockatoo and Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitats. Historic heritage sites will be protected and, where appropriate, interpreted. Support for continuing Aboriginal connection to Country will facilitate the conservation and interpretation of Aboriginal heritage and the contribution of traditional ecological and cultural knowledge to continuously improve land management. Reserve profiles and zone maps The following summary profiles for each of the reserves in this complex outline the landscape and local-level actions to guide management. The management plan and relevant strategies will inform land management programs and priorities across Canberra Nature Park. The accompanying zone maps serve to assist the community and Canberra Nature Park stakeholders and partners with expectations and directions for land use activities, consistent with conservation of the natural environment. 226 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 227.
Melrose Nature Reserve Establishment: Melrose Nature Reserve (193 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve is an important link for wildlife moving from Rob Roy and Tuggeranong Hill into woodland and forest in NSW in the vicinity of Googong Foreshores and the Tinderry Nature Reserve. Natural values: Melrose protects: » important woodland–open forest bird habitat, which includes a recorded nest tree that may be used by the vulnerable Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides) » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (on about 20% of the reserve) » large populations of Silky Swainson-pea (Swainsona sericea) and Wedge Diuris (Diuris dendrobioides) and a small population of the vulnerable Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida). The endangered Buttercup Doubletail (Diuris aequalis) has been recorded in the adjacent rail reserve. » a population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella). Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists two Aboriginal heritage sites within the reserve and a Travelling Stock Route in the north-east of the reserve. The remnants of a house site, probably the home of the Brennan family, is found on a level terrace to the east of Tuggeranong Creek. Recreation: Recreational use of the reserve is limited. Dogs and horses are prohibited. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Management: There has been some clearing within the reserve, but vegetation is generally in good condition with a diverse understorey. The adjoining rail reserve has high conservation value and is a major habitat of the endangered Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta). A pine plantation borders the reserve at the northern end. The long-term management aim is to conserve connectivity and woodland bird habitat as well as populations of native plants, and to investigate the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain plant diversity and improve woodland condition, with a focus on protecting populations of rare plants » maintain connectivity to other woodland areas » identify and map the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. BRIAN PRINCE 228 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Note: For information on areas identified as other land managed by ACTPCS refer to s. 1.10 Environment.act.gov.au | 229.
Rob Roy Nature Reserve (part closed reserve) Establishment: Rob Roy Nature Reserve (2017 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve has good connectivity with Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve, the Murrumbidgee River and Namadgi National Park, as well as with Googong Foreshores and the Tinderry Nature Reserve in NSW. Natural values: Rob Roy protects: » important woodland bird habitat (the reserve has high connectivity and is generally isolated from urban development impacts) » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red-Gum Grassy Woodland (over about 10% of its area) » a widespread population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) » major habitat for several plant species that are rare in the ACT, and for a several regionally rare species » small populations of the vulnerable Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida) and endangered Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans) » important wildlife movement across the landscape, for example migrating honeyeaters » the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami), which has been recorded in the reserve. Cultural values: The ACT Heritage Register lists over 40 Aboriginal heritage sites. The remnants of an early settler homestead (possibly the Gibbs family’s) are found in the reserve. Recreation: Access is currently limited as parts of the reserve are closed and it is largely surrounded by rural land. Dogs and horses are prohibited. Cycling is permitted only on management trails. Access restrictions: The northern and middle areas of the reserve are under rural lease and have been declared closed under s. 259 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Access to these areas is prohibited except for the lessee, and people authorised by the lessee. Management: The reserve has a long history of grazing by both sheep and cattle. There has been significant tree-clearing in the north-west and diversity in the ground layer is depleted. Parts of the reserve have high‑quality woodland-open forest understorey, while other areas are either exotic or native pasture and have a high weed cover. The long-term management aim is to conserve connectivity, woodland bird habitat and Pink-tailed Worm‑lizard habitat. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » maintain plant diversity » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas investigate options for the rehabilitation of the former leased land on the north-west side of the reserve » identify and map the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat. ANDREW TATNELL 230 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 231.
Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve Establishment: Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve (365 hectares) was established in 1993. The Conservator has assigned the reserve to IUCN protected area management category IV: habitat/species management area. Connectivity: The reserve links through Rob Roy Nature Reserve to Namadgi National Park and the Murrumbidgee River and east into NSW and the Tinderry Nature Reserve. Natural values: Tuggeranong Hill protects: » a large woodland/forest area important for regional wildlife movement » critically endangered Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland » important habitat for woodland birds » a large area of Drooping She-oak (Allocasuarina verticillata) open forest, including some old-growth areas, which are a food source for the vulnerable Glossy Black-cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) » a large population of the vulnerable Pale Pomaderris (Pomaderris pallida) » a large population of the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella). Cultural values: Aboriginal grinding grooves within the reserve are listed on the ACT Heritage Register. Stone artefact scatters have also been recorded. Recreation: The reserve is popular for walking, running and cycling. Dogs are permitted on leash on a track or trail. Horses are prohibited. Cycling is permitted only on management trails and sealed cycle paths. Access restrictions:: Public access to the rural lease area in the south-east of the reserve is prohibited without the permission of the lessee. Community involvement: Friends of Tuggeranong Hill ParkCare group carries out weeding in the reserve, targeting mostly woody weeds such as privet, hawthorn, rosehip and lavender, and also undertakes Vegwatch surveys. Canberra Ornithologists Group has monitored birds in the reserve since 2000. Management: Much of the woodland is in good condition and supports a high diversity of over 200 native plant species. Sheet erosion has occurred on some hill slopes. The long-term management aim is to conserve vegetation diversity, condition and connectivity, and to conserve Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat and the Aboriginal axe-grinding groove site. Key actions: In addition to actions identified in Part 1 of this plan, reserve management will aim to: » manage the axe-grinding grooves in consultation with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians » maintain plant diversity » maintain and improve condition and connectivity of woodland patches within the reserve and connectivity to other woodland areas » investigate options to stimulate cone production in Drooping She-oak stands to provide a food source for Glossy Black-cockatoo » identify and map the extent of Pink-tailed Worm-lizard habitat » continue to support the Friends of Tuggeranong Hill ParkCare. ANDREW TATNELL 232 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Environment.act.gov.au | 233.
EARLY NANCY (WURMBEA DIOICA) (MARK JEKABSONS) APPENDICES: » Appendix 1: Table of goals, key outcomes, policies, objectives and actions » Appendix 2: Legislative and policy framework » Appendix 3: IUCN Category IV management objectives and Canberra Nature Park » Appendix 4: Geological features of Canberra Nature Park » Glossary » References.
Appendix 1: Table of goals, key outcomes, policies, objectives and actions Priority for implementation of actions High: Implemented within three years of the publication of this plan. Medium: Implemented within five years of the publication of this plan. Low: Implemented within the life of this plan. * Ongoing actions: Some actions will be ongoing throughout the life of the plan. 1. INTRODUCTION Implementation and management responsibilities ACTIONS PRIORITY 1. Develop five yearly implementation plans and, in consultation with stakeholders, annual operations plans. High* 2. Review reserve boundaries and tenancy agreements and implement appropriate changes to the Territory Plan Public Land overlay. High 2. PLANTS AND ANIMALS GOALS Ecosystems and species are managed, in the face of a changing climate, for long-term viability and are well connected across the landscape. KEY OUTCOMES » Structure, function, composition and extent of ecosystems are maintained and/or improved. » Native species diversity and high value habitats are maintained and enhanced in priority areas. » Landscape connections between ecosystems are enhanced. » Threats, such as weeds, pest animals and inappropriate fire are managed. POLICIES » Ecological communities and threatened species will be managed in accordance with relevant ACT ecosystem strategies and threatened species action plans. » Reserve management will be evidence based and incorporate adaptive management. » Reserve management will prioritise: • conserving threatened species and threatened ecological communities, particularly where the reserve is identified as critical habitat • maintaining and improving the extent and condition of native vegetation • maintaining and improving habitat connectivity • protecting significant and or sensitive vegetation communities, and plant and animal species, from adverse impacts of physical disturbance • minimising the impact of other threats to native plants, animals and ecological communities. Environment.act.gov.au | 235.
2. PLANTS AND ANIMALS Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Threatened and rare ecological communities are conserved and rehabilitated. » The diversity, extent, condition, connectivity and resilience of native ecological communities are maintained and/or improved. » Threatened native animal species, and the diversity of other animal populations, are conserved. » Habitat for woodland birds and other native fauna is conserved and improved. » Habitat connectivity is maintained and strengthened to support ecosystem resilience. » Threats to native plants, animals and ecological communities are minimised. 3. Prepare and promote management guidelines, as required, for threatened and significant ecological communities, plants and animals. High* 4. Plan and implement (assisted) rehabilitation of ecological communities, priority plant species and animal habitat. High* 5. Prioritise restoration/regeneration activities that: • increase habitat size, condition and connection • reduce perimeter-to-area ratio of habitat patches • assist species movement within and across reserves that contain bottlenecks or break points in connectivity. High* 6. Make information on the locations of significant and/or sensitive ecological communities, plants and animal habitat accessible to land managers, ParkCarers and contractors. High* 7. Identify opportunities and requirements to protect habitat diversity and refugia at the landscape and reserve scale. High* 8. Provide opportunities and support for adjoining landholders and the community to improve ecosystems. Medium* 9. Incorporate traditional ecological knowledge and practices into reserve management. Medium* 10. Investigate and implement measures to improve genetic diversity of isolated populations of endangered plants and animals including reintroductions of species where and if conditions are suitable and natural recruitment is not possible. Low/ Medium 11. Utilise mechanisms under the Nature Conservation Act for the Conservator to close reserves to protect conservation values, for example in key woodland bird habitat during the spring/summer breeding season. High* 12. Liaise/share information with other agencies and land managers as required to: • encourage the protection of scattered trees, particularly mature or hollow bearing trees, in modified landscapes, including urban and peri-urban areas • minimise impacts from new developments or infrastructure in areas key for connectivity • explore possibilities for improving connections within reserves, between reserves, through the urban areas, and to the wider regional landscape • ensure consideration of connectivity and linkages in the implementation of the Urban Forest Strategy. Medium* 236 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
2. PLANTS AND ANIMALS Grazing management OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Conservation grazing regimes support protection of threatened species and improve ecosystem function. » Overabundant animal species are managed to reduce impacts on reserve values. 13. Manage Eastern Grey Kangaroo populations in accordance with the Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan. High* 14. Manage and actively monitor total grazing pressure and impacts to achieve conservation objectives, particularly in grassy ecosystems where threatened animal species have particular habitat requirements. High* 15. Utilise strategic grazing (by livestock) if necessary to achieve conservation and Bushfire Operational Plan objectives. Medium* Fire OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Ecological burning regimes are established, implemented and monitored. » Cultural burning practices are established, implemented and monitored. » The adverse impacts of fire-fuel management on biodiversity values are minimised while life and property are protected. 16. Undertake fire management activities in accordance with the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT, and with relevant Regional Fire Management Plans and annual Bushfire Operational Plans. High* 17. Integrate the requirements of the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT with the protection of threatened, rare or fire- sensitive species, their habitat and ecological function by: • implementing ecological guidelines for fire fuel and access management operations, protection measures to support the long-term maintenance of plant and animal communities, and retaining habitat refugia by utilising landscape mosaic burning regimes • monitoring the effectiveness of burning in contributing to conservation outcomes and fire risk mitigation outcomes • monitoring the impacts of prescribed burning and unplanned fire. High* 18. Manage fire to achieve conservation objectives in grassland, woodland and forest ecosystems. High* 19. Plan and implement cultural burns with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. High* Weeds OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Weeds are excluded, eradicated, controlled or contained to minimise and mitigate adverse impacts on conservation values. 20. Actively manage invasive weeds in accordance with the ACT Weeds Strategy and annual invasive weeds operations plan. High* 21. Systematically map and monitor the distribution and spread of weeds to detect trends and improve effectiveness of control programs for conservation. Medium* 22. Strengthen partnerships with adjacent land managers, volunteer groups, citizen scientists and the community in weed management to improve cost-effectiveness and reduce weed re-invasion including early detection of new incursions, surveillance and coordinated weed control. High* 23. Make information accessible to help the community to identify and report new weed species of concern. Medium* Environment.act.gov.au | 237.
2. PLANTS AND ANIMALS Pest animals OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Pest animals are excluded, eradicated or controlled to minimise adverse impacts on conservation values. 24. Monitor pest animals and implement management actions in accordance with the ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy and annual vertebrate pest operations plans. High* 25. Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of pest animal control in relation to conservation outcomes. Medium 26. Strengthen partnerships with adjacent land managers and the community in pest animal management to improve cost- effectiveness and reduce pest re-invasion including surveillance and coordinated pest control. High* Biosecurity OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Diseases are excluded, eradicated, controlled or contained to minimise and mitigate adverse impacts on values. » Research capacity on biosecurity, in particular invasive species, is increased. 27. Identify options for the early control or exclusion of biosecurity risks. Medium* 28. Coordinate disease control in cooperation with adjoining land managers. Low* 29. Support collaborative invasive species research with research partners. Medium* Climate change OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Ecosystem resilience to a changing climate is strengthened. » Knowledge and understanding of the implications of climate change for the values of Canberra Nature Park are improved and inform management decisions. 30. Assess risk and resilience of species and ecological communities to climate change impacts and prioritise the development of management responses for those most at risk. Medium 31. Promote resilience to climate change by: • maintaining and restoring species and habitat diversity in ecological communities • identifying, managing and protecting potential climate refugia and landscape connections • maintaining large, well connected and genetically diverse populations. Medium 32. Conduct research and trial additional management responses to improve resilience in species and ecological communities to climate change impacts. Medium 238 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
3. LAND AND WATER GOALS Canberra Nature Park protects and contributes to the special character of Canberra as Australia’s ‘city in the landscape’. KEY OUTCOMES » The landscape features of Canberra Nature Park are protected to maintain the visual backdrop and landscape setting of the National Capital. POLICIES » Activities, works or infrastructure that adversely impact on the landscapes, soils, geological sites or hydrology of Canberra Nature Park will be avoided or minimised. Landscapes OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » The visual amenity of Canberra Nature Park’s hills, ridges and buffer spaces is retained to protect the landscape setting of the city. 33. Provide input into design proposals and other works to ensure visual intrusion on the landscape is minimised. Medium Geology, soils and land surface condition OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Geological values, soils and land surface condition are protected and improved. 34. Identify, map and protect significant geological sites from disturbance. High* 35. Analyse soil maps and hydrogeological data to identify risks and areas for monitoring and remediation. High* 36. Minimise erosion through grazing management, fire management, revegetation, reinstatement of coarse woody debris and other appropriate mechanisms. High* 37. Minimise activities that cause physical disturbance to geological features or soil and land surface condition, or impacts on hydrology. Medium Water OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » The condition of creeks, drainage lines and dams is maintained and improved where required. 38. Protect creeks, drainage lines and dams from disturbance. High* 39. Rehabilitate damaged creeks, drainage lines and dams and improve the condition of aquatic habitats. Medium* Environment.act.gov.au | 239.
4. ABORIGINAL CONNECTION TO COUNTRY GOALS Traditional Custodians’ aspirations to care for Country are respected and enabled and their connection to Country is enhanced, with traditional practices enriching contemporary management and cultural, social and economic benefits accruing to Traditional Custodians and society. KEY OUTCOMES » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations are involved in reserve management. » Access to Country for cultural purposes is encouraged and supported. » Aboriginal heritage sites are protected. POLICIES » Aboriginal connection with Country, past and present, is acknowledged and will continue to be supported. » Aboriginal heritage places and objects will be protected and managed in accordance with statutory requirements and the Burra Charter and its guidelines. » The principles of Ask First and Free, Prior and Informed Consent will guide engagement with Aboriginal people to identify, conserve and interpret Aboriginal heritage. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians will be involved in managing Canberra Nature Park as a living cultural landscape. » Aboriginal cultural rights will be respected in accordance with the Human Rights Act 2004. 240 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
4. ABORIGINAL CONNECTION TO COUNTRY OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee works with PCS to guide management of Canberra Nature Park. » Cooperative management arrangements for Canberra Nature Park are established with Traditional Custodians. » Canberra Nature Park provides a venue to connect Aboriginal people to Country. » Aboriginal cultural values, including places and objects, are protected and conserved. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians are actively involved in conserving and interpreting Aboriginal cultural heritage. » Traditional knowledge is incorporated into reserve management to improve environmental and cultural outcomes. » Community awareness of Aboriginal cultural heritage and connection to Country is increased. » The cultural landscape values and Aboriginal history of the reserves are better understood and interpreted. » Canberra Nature Park reserves are jointly named with an appropriate name identified by Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. 40. Work with the Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee and Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to progress cooperative management arrangements for Canberra Nature Park. High* 41. Develop a strategic approach to protecting, managing and interpreting Aboriginal cultural heritage, led by Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. Medium 42. Undertake an assessment of Aboriginal cultural heritage across Canberra Nature Park in partnership with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians, Representative Aboriginal Organisations and the ACT Heritage Council. Medium 43. Encourage and facilitate opportunistic heritage surveys when favourable conditions arise, for example after fires. Medium 44. Develop conservation management plans (approved through ACT Heritage Council) for selected Aboriginal heritage places, with the early involvement of Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations. Medium 45. Work with the Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee to increase the involvement of Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians in management activities, including traditional burning practices, and to achieve their objectives for cultural water flows. High* 46. Incorporate and implement the aspirations, values, practices and protocols of the Ngunnawal people in legislation and EPSDD policy. High 47. Continue to assess Aboriginal heritage values prior to works within Canberra Nature Park and modify proposals to avoid interference with or damage to Aboriginal heritage places and/ or objects, and report any Aboriginal sites or objects found to the ACT Heritage Council. High* 48. Consult with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians on the naming of new reserves, or dual naming of existing reserves with Ngunnawal language. High* 49. Deliver Aboriginal cultural awareness training for Parks and Conservation staff and relevant contractors. High* 50. Prepare a Cultural Resource Management Plan with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to facilitate ongoing living cultural connections and access to natural resources and locations for cultural purposes, while guiding their sustainable use and conservation. High Environment.act.gov.au | 241.
5. HISTORIC (NON-ABORIGINAL) HERITAGE GOALS Historic heritage values are protected, interpreted and well maintained. KEY OUTCOMES » Historic heritage sites are conserved and interpreted to enhance understanding. POLICIES » Historic heritage places and objects will be protected and managed in accordance with statutory requirements and the Burra Charter and its guidelines. » The history of past land use and occupation will be reflected in named places and interpretive material. » Descendants of families with a strong historical association with places in the reserves, and local historians, will be respected and involved in heritage management. OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Historic heritage sites are protected and conserved. » Awareness of historic heritage, including past land use and the legacy for reserves today, is increased. » The community is engaged in managing and conserving historic heritage places. 51. Protect, manage and interpret historic heritage including: • investigating historic heritage values before commencing works and modifying proposals to avoid impact • encouraging research and promoting the results where appropriate • recognising community attachment to heritage places and involving the community in management and interpretation • mapping all historic plantings and documenting management direction in consultation with the community • monitoring heritage sites. Medium* 52. Develop and review conservation management plans for significant historic heritage sites and implement works as specified. Medium* 6. MANAGEMENT ZONING POLICIES » Policies for infrastructure are shown in Table 6.2 Policies for the construction and location of infrastructure in defined management zones. 242 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
7. NATURE-BASED EXPERIENCES GOALS Canberra Nature Park makes a significant contribution to the liveability of the city and health and wellbeing of the community. KEY OUTCOMES » Nature-based experiences, including recreation and tourism, are enhanced through the provision of contemporary facilities, programs and information. » Accessibility is increased through the use of innovative technology and enabling facilities. » Canberra Nature Park provides a key venue for activities and experiences that improve community physical, emotional and social well-being. POLICIES » Nature-based experiences, including recreation, health and tourism activities, will be encouraged and supported through the provision of contemporary facilities, programs and information. » Low impact activities that are consistent with government initiatives and programs to encourage healthy and active living will be supported where appropriate within Canberra Nature Park. » Bins will not be provided in Canberra Nature Park nature reserves and visitors are required to remove all waste, including dog faeces. » The Parks and Conservation Service will regularly liaise with user groups and seek their input on decisions relating to activities and facilities. » Restrictions on dogs in all nature reserves will continue to apply, including retention of the ‘on leash’ requirement and restricting dogs to formal tracks and trails. » Approval for dog walking in some locations will be reviewed if dogs are found to be having a significant adverse impact on reserve values. » Cycling and mountain biking are not permitted on walking tracks. » Off-trail use of motorised vehicles in Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment is prohibited and their use on trails in the reserves will be reduced. » Consideration will be given to approving motorised vehicle use on management trails within Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve only for limited 4WD driver training or where it is required to provide safe connections between areas of the broader Kowen Forest for an event. Environment.act.gov.au | 243.
7. NATURE-BASED EXPERIENCES Nature-based activities OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » The accessibility and amenity of Canberra Nature Park are enhanced and community enjoyment of nature and the benefits it provides are increased. » Residents and visitors have a greater appreciation of the natural and cultural values of Canberra Nature Park and the range of nature-based experiences available. » Newly arrived Canberrans and visitors are welcomed to Canberra Nature Park through enjoyable, culturally appropriate, interactive experiences that encourage regular visits. » Levels and types of visitor use are consistent with the conservation of natural and cultural heritage. » Park managers have a greater understanding of existing types and levels of recreation and visitor use. 53. Establish a visitor experience framework for Canberra Nature Park consistent with the Territory wide framework. Medium 54. Support community involvement in nature-based experiences through provision of enhanced facilities and visitor programs, the use of innovative technology, and increased availability of information. Medium* 55. Gather spatial and temporal data on visitor use (including through the use of new technology) to better inform management of Canberra Nature Park. Medium* 56. Use the Trails ACT Planning and Management Guidelines criteria to review tracks and trails and prepare a track management plan, including closing informal tracks and classifying any new tracks in accordance with Australian standards. High 57. Trial the provision of additional horse riding access to defined trails in a small number of reserves. High 58. Develop and implement a strategy to reduce the on-trail use of motorised vehicles in Molonglo Gorge and Kowen reserves. High 59. Implement measures to mitigate hazards to visitor safety. High* 244 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
7. NATURE-BASED EXPERIENCES Nature-based health and well-being OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Nature-based activities in Canberra Nature Park contribute to the improved emotional, physical, and spiritual health and well- being of our community. » Canberra Nature Park is valued for the health and well-being benefits it provides. 60. Support ACT Government initiatives for healthy and active living in Canberra Nature Park reserves (where appropriate). Medium* 61. Encourage partnerships and cooperation with relevant organisations to improve and promote the health and community benefits of nature-based activities. Medium* 62. Explore partnerships with health providers to increase use of Canberra Nature Park as a venue for healing and well-being. Medium* 63. Provide culturally appropriate activities for new Canberrans to experience nature, to feel safe and to develop an understanding of ACT’s natural and cultural values. Medium* Nature-based tourism/events OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Tourism activities within Canberra Nature Park are primarily related to an appreciation of its natural and cultural values. » The potential for nature- based tourism activities in Canberra Nature Park is considered in the context of a strategic approach to visitor experience and ecotourism across ACT reserves, and conservation of the natural environment. 64. Promote Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and Jerrabomberra Wetlands (which has a separate management plan) as key destinations for environmental education activities, supported by the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. High* 65. Implement the ACT 2020 Tourism Strategy (Domestic Marketing Strategy), where applicable, in nature reserves. High* 66. Explore opportunities for holding appropriate community ‘events’ in Canberra Nature Park. Medium* Environment.act.gov.au | 245.
8. COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT GOALS Life-long connections between people, nature and parks are created through learning opportunities inspired by nature. KEY OUTCOMES » Visitor experience is enriched by a range of opportunities and activities that promote appreciation, understanding and care of the natural and cultural values. » Community stewardship of reserves through volunteer activities contributes to social cohesion, environmental knowledge and shared management. » The knowledge and wisdom of Canberra’s community is harnessed to inform reserve management. » Novel and diverse partnerships with private, corporate, NGO and government sectors enhance reserve management. » Local schools use Canberra Nature Park for nature-based learning. » Online information about the natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park is readily accessible. POLICIES » The Parks and Conservation Service will support environmental education and interpretation activities across Canberra Nature Park to increase community understanding and stewardship of reserve values. » The Parks and Conservation Service will forge stronger partnerships and relationships with ParkCare and ‘Friends of’ groups, catchment groups, and other volunteer groups, neighbours, Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations to increase community involvement in reserve management. Nature’s classroom - providing educational experiences in Canberra Nature Park OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Connections between people and nature are created by providing multiple ways for people of all ages to learn and be inspired by nature. » Education and interpretation increase community understanding of reserve values and involvement in their protection. » Online information about the about natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park is readily accessible. » Canberra’s kindergarten and primary school students have access to nature-based learning activities in Canberra Nature Park. » Visitors are aware of and comply with legislation and policies that guide access to, and appropriate use of, Canberra Nature Park. 67. Deliver an interpretation strategy for Canberra Nature Park. High 68. Encourage and facilitate increased educational programs and interpretation activities throughout Canberra Nature Park by working in partnerships with institutions and organisations that have a strong interest in, and knowledge of, reserve values. Medium* 69. Provide reserve users with accessible information to encourage appreciation of the natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park and appropriate use of the reserves. Medium* 70. Engage Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians in the interpretation of cultural heritage values, including the possible establishment of sites that interpret how Ngunnawal people use Canberra Nature Park, its food and its plants. Medium* 71. Establish ranger-led learning activities for kindergarten and primary school aged children, linked to the appropriate education curriculum. Medium* 72. Establish parkschool relationships with all schools in close proximity to Canberra Nature Park. Medium* 73. Update and promote best practice guidelines for reserve visitors and user-groups. High 74. Provide educational material on topical issues such as: • current research • management of kangaroo populations • risks to reserves posed by invasive garden plants. Medium 246 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
8. COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT Community involvement in park management OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » The knowledge and wisdom of Canberra’s community are harnessed to inform and enhance reserve management. » Community engagement programs and activities improve management outcomes for Canberra Nature Park. » Traditional Custodians and other local Aboriginal groups have increased involvement in land management and cultural activities. » Novel and diverse partnerships with private, corporate, NGO and government sectors contribute to the conservation of Canberra Nature Park and the environmental and socio- economic fabric of the ACT. 75. Encourage and support volunteering, for example through ParkCare, catchment groups, schools and other community groups. High* 76. Expand the ParkCare model to support the establishment of new groups and the participation of international volunteers. Low 77. Ensure partners and volunteers are safe and equipped to manage day to day activities. High* 78. Maximise the contribution that communities can make to Canberra Nature Park by exploring innovative ways to tap into community skills, knowledge and enthusiasm. Medium* Environment.act.gov.au | 247.
9. RESEARCH AND MONITORING GOALS Scientific evidence underpins management decisions. KEY OUTCOMES » Programs are implemented that provide an evidence-based framework for increased management effectiveness. » Universities and research organisations are involved in long term social and ecological research programs. POLICIES » Research that improves knowledge and contributes to increased management effectiveness of natural and cultural values will be supported. » Opportunities will be sought for collaborative partnerships with universities and other research sectors and institutions to inform and improve park management. » Citizen science will be supported. OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Research and monitoring inform adaptive management of natural and cultural values. » ACT Government research provides a sound evidence base for land management and conservation decisions in Canberra Nature Park. » Universities in Canberra have established long term social and ecological research programs across Canberra Nature Park. 79. Continue to support research partnerships with universities and other research institutions. Medium* 80. Continue to develop and implement the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program to inform adaptive management across Canberra Nature Park. High* 81. Prioritise research with a focus on: • ecology and population genetics of threatened or declining species • processes driving the abundance, distribution and condition of reserve ecological values • vegetation and wildlife response to different fire regimes, including the season, frequency and intensity of burning • developing effective restoration and management techniques for threatened communities and species habitat • the desirability and feasibility of reintroducing locally extinct native animal species • the implications of climate change for the biota of the region • developing a better understanding of the types, levels and impacts of recreation and visitor use • supporting the Mulligans Flat—Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary, and the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust. Medium 82. Support and promote the use of citizen science and integrate results into management. Medium* 248 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
10. PLANNING, APPROVALS AND COMPLIANCE POLICIES » Relevant statutory processes will be followed for all proposed activities and works in Canberra Nature Park. » New infrastructure will utilise the lowest impact option and will only be located: • in already disturbed areas or co-located with other services • with reference to reserve management zones. OBJECTIVES ACTIONS PRIORITY » Appropriate environmental assessments are undertaken to ensure that reserve values are not damaged or compromised. » Monitoring of activities ensures that actions avoid or minimise impact on reserve values, and that any damage is repaired. » Visitors comply with all legislative and policy requirements. » Rural leases over nature reserves are managed for identified conservation outcomes. 83. Ensure all works proposed in reserves are subject to appropriate assessment and approval processes to minimise impacts on reserve values, including habitat connectivity. High* 84. Establish management agreements under the Nature Conservation Act with all major utility providers operating in Canberra Nature Park. High* 85. Implement hygiene protocols during all works, management activities and events. Medium 86. Monitor management activities and approved works and report non-compliance against approval conditions. Medium 87. Seek to recover costs associated with rehabilitating damage caused by others. High 88. Increase compliance efforts to minimise impacts of illegal and inappropriate behaviour on reserve visitors and conservation values. High* 89. Record and analyse incidents of behaviour in breach of legislation or incompatible with the provisions of this plan and take appropriate action, including the issuing of infringement notices or prosecution where necessary. High* 90. Harness technology to improve delivery and reporting of management actions. High* 91. Identify, assess and manage risks associated with contaminated sites in reserves, in accordance with the Contaminated Sites Environment Protection Policy 2017 made under the Environment Protection Act 1997. High* 92. Ensure that Land Management Agreements prescribe the protection of identified values. Medium* 93. Support lessees to protect identified conservation values on rural leases. Medium* 94. Monitor conservation values in rural leases within Canberra Nature Park. Medium* 95. Review tenancy agreements and other informal arrangements for areas not managed by the Parks and Conservation Service. Medium Environment.act.gov.au | 249.
Appendix 2: Legislative and policy framework The primary legislative and policy framework for management of Canberra Nature Park is outlined in Section 1.2 and includes The Territory Plan, the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Planning and Development Act 2007, the Nature Conservation Strategy, the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC) and IUCN categorisation. Other legislation, strategies and action plans relevant to Canberra Nature Park are described below. International The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity is an international legal instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. Australia ratified the Convention in 1983 and, in line with it, prepared a national strategy. National The Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988 (Commonwealth) established the National Capital Authority with responsibility for preparing and administering a National Capital Plan. The Act defines two categories of land in the ACT: National Land managed by the Commonwealth, for example the National Triangle; and Territory Land managed by the ACT Government on behalf of the Commonwealth. Australia’s Biodiversity Conservation Strategy 2010–2030 and Strategy for the National Reserve System 2009–2030 provide frameworks for protecting biological diversity and maintaining ecological processes and systems. Throughout Australia, attention is being directed to protecting and building ecological connectivity across the wider landscape in the face of climate change. Under the auspices of the National Reserves System Cooperative Program, Australia has been divided into 85 bioregions. These are large, geographically distinct areas of land with common characteristics such as climate, ecological features, and plant and animal communities (DEWHA 2009a). The ACT falls within the Australian Alps and South Eastern Highlands bioregions, sharing its environmental characteristics with surrounding NSW and parts of Victoria. The Burra Charter: The Australia ICOMOS Charter for Places of Cultural Significance and associated guidelines provide a best practice standard for managing cultural heritage sites in Australia. Some Aboriginal communities do not consider these guidelines to be appropriate. ACT legislation Animal Diseases Act 2005 provides for the control of endemic and exotic diseases of animals. Animal Welfare Act 1992 promotes vertebrate animal welfare, and controls activities that cause suffering to animals. The Act includes the gazetted code of practice for culling kangaroos and wallabies: Animal Welfare (Humane Shooting of Kangaroos and Wallabies) Code of Practice 2014 (No 1). Crimes Act 1900 consolidates statutes related to criminal law. Domestic Animals Act 2000 requires that certain animals, including dogs and cats, be identified and registered, setting out the duties of owners, carers and keepers. The Act includes provisions for declaring cat curfews in nominated areas. Environment Protection Act 1997 provides a regulatory framework to reduce and eliminate the discharge of pollutants into the air, land and water. Prohibited Weapons Act 1996 prohibits the possession of certain dangerous weapons and other articles. Firearms Act 1996 provides for the use of firearms by park personnel. 250 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Fisheries ACT 2000 aims to conserve native fish species and habitats and to sustainably manage ACT fisheries. Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005 lists pest plants and animals and provides for the development of pest animal and pest plant management plans. Public Health Act 1997 provides for the protection of the public from public health risks, including those relating to water quality. Public Unleased Land Act 2013 provides for the use of public unleased land while ensuring the amenity and natural value of public places are not diminished. Roads and Public Places Act 1937 provides for temporary roads, temporary closure of roads and use of public places. Stock Act 2005 contains regulations for the control of stock and ruminants. Litter Act 2004 provides for the control and regulation of litter, including dumping. Trespass on Territory Land Act 1932 provides for the regulation of straying stock, illegal camping and unauthorised occupation of public or private land. Water Resources Act 2007 provides for the sustainable use and management of ACT water resources; the protection of aquatic ecosystems and aquifers from damage and, where practicable, reversal of past damage. ACT strategies and plans Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan 2017 sets out the approach to be adopted in maintaining wild populations of Eastern Grey Kangaroos in the ACT while managing their environmental, economic and social impacts and ensuring their welfare. ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans 2018 takes an integrated territory-wide approach, within a regional context, to the protection and management of the rivers and riparian areas in the ACT that support threatened species and ecological communities, and seeks to maintain and improve the natural integrity of the rivers and riparian zones. ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans 2019 sets out a strategic, integrated approach to protecting, maintaining and improving the condition of the ACT’s remaining native woodlands and conserving woodland dependent species. ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans 2017 will guide the protection, management and restoration of native grasslands and their component species over the next 10 years. ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–2023 establishes a policy framework for conservation of biodiversity across all tenures in the ACT. The strategy’s vision for nature conservation in the ACT over the next decade is for ‘biodiversity rich, resilient landscapes stretching from the inner city to the mountains, where well-functioning ecosystems can meet the needs of people and the environment’. ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy 2012–2022 sets out the steps in a strategic approach to developing and implementing a vertebrate pest animal management program. Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the ACT, Version Four sets out strategies and specific actions by which the ACT community and the ACT Government can better manage bushfires and reduce the bushfire risk to life, property and the environment. ACT Weeds Strategy 2009–2019 aims to reduce the impact of weeds on the environment, the economy, human health and amenity, and recognises that weed management is an integral component of sustainable management of natural resources and the environment. Environment.act.gov.au | 251.
Appendix 3: IUCN Category IV management objectives 4 and Canberra Nature Park 4 From Procedure for applying IUVN Protected Area Categories to ACT Reserves approved by the ACT Minister for the Environment and Sustainable Development, September 2012. 5 Notifiable Instrument N12016-526, September 2016. The Conservator has assigned5 all Canberra Nature Park nature reserves to International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Category IV: Habitat/Species Management Area. The Nature Conservation Act 2014 (s 174 (3)) requires that the reserves will be managed in accordance with the IUCN objectives. The following table identifies policies and objectives within the Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan which contribute to the IUCN Category IV objectives. IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: To maintain, conserve and restore species and habitats. CH. 2 Plants and animals POLICIES » Ecological communities and threatened species will be managed in accordance with relevant ACT ecosystem strategies and threatened species action plans. » Reserve management will be evidence based and adaptive. » Reserve management will prioritise: • conserving threatened species and threatened ecological communities, particularly where the reserve is identified as critical habitat • maintaining and improving the extent and condition of native vegetation • maintaining and improving habitat connectivity • protecting significant or sensitive vegetation communities, and plant and animal species, from adverse impacts of physical disturbance • minimising the impact of other threats to native plants, animals and ecological communities. OBJECTIVES Ecosystems, native animals and habitat connectivity » Threatened and rare ecological communities (Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, Snow Gum Grassy Woodland, Red Box woodland/open forest and native grasslands) are conserved and rehabilitated. » The diversity, extent, condition, connectivity and resilience of native ecological communities are maintained and/or improved. » Threatened native animal species, and the diversity of other animal populations, are conserved. » Habitat for woodland birds and other native fauna is conserved and improved. » Habitat connectivity is maintained and strengthened to support ecosystem resilience. » Threats to native plants, animals and ecological communities are minimised. 252 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: To maintain, conserve and restore species and habitats. Grazing management » Conservation grazing regimes support protection of threatened species and improve ecosystem function. » Overabundant animal species are managed to reduce impacts on reserve values. Fire » Ecological burning regimes are established, implemented and monitored. » Cultural burning practices are established, implemented and monitored. » The adverse impacts of fire-fuel management on biodiversity values are minimised while life and property are protected. Weeds » Weeds are excluded, eradicated, controlled or contained to minimise and mitigate adverse impacts on conservation values. Pest animals » Pest animals are excluded, eradicated or controlled to minimise adverse impacts on conservation values. Biosecurity » Diseases are excluded, eradicated, controlled or contained to minimise and mitigate adverse impacts on values. » Research capacity on biosecurity, in particular invasive species, is increased. Climate change » Ecosystem resilience to a changing climate is strengthened. » Knowledge and understanding of the implications of climate change for the values of Canberra Nature Park are improved and inform management planning and decision making. CH. 3 Land and water POLICIES » Activities, works or infrastructure that adversely impact on the landscapes, soils, geological sites and hydrology of Canberra Nature Park will be avoided or minimised. OBJECTIVES Landscape setting » The visual amenity of Canberra Nature Park’s hills, ridges and buffer spaces is retained to protect the landscape setting of the city. Geology and soils Geological values, soils and land surface condition are protected and improved. Water The condition of creeks, drainage lines and dams is maintained and improved where required. Environment.act.gov.au | 253.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: To maintain, conserve and restore species and habitats. CH. 6 Reserve management zones Management zones The purpose of zoning is to ensure that any impacts from activities such as the construction of recreational facilities or utility infrastructure or other disturbances are directed into the less sensitive parts of Canberra Nature Park where conservation values are less likely to be compromised. Zone 1: Core Conservation areas have sensitive values most likely to be impacted by physical disturbance. Zone 2: Conservation and landscape (general protection) area areas where conservation values are less sensitive to disturbance and less likely to be impacted. CH.9 Research and monitoring POLICIES » Research that improves knowledge and contributes to increased management effectiveness of natural and cultural values will be supported. » Opportunities will be sought for collaborative partnerships with universities and other research sectors and institutions to inform and improve park management. » Citizen science will be supported. OBJECTIVES » Research and monitoring inform adaptive management of natural and cultural values. » ACT Government research provides a sound evidence base for land management and conservation decisions in Canberra Nature Park. » Universities in Canberra have established long term social and ecological research programs across Canberra Nature Park. CH. 10 Planning, approvals and compliance POLICIES » Relevant statutory processes will be followed for all proposed activities and works in Canberra Nature Park. » New infrastructure will utilise the lowest impact option and will only be located: • in already disturbed areas or co-located with other services • with reference to reserve management zones. OBJECTIVES » Appropriate environmental assessments are undertaken to ensure that reserve values are not damaged or compromised. » Monitoring of activities ensures that actions avoid or minimise impact on reserve values, and that any damage is repaired. » Visitors comply with all legislative and policy requirements. » Rural leases over nature reserves are managed for conservation outcomes. 254 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 OTHER OBJECTIVES: To protect vegetation patterns or other biological features through traditional management approaches. CH. 4 Aboriginal Connection to Country POLICIES » Aboriginal connection with Country, past and present, is acknowledged and will continue to be supported. » Aboriginal heritage places and objects will be protected and managed in accordance with statutory requirements and the Burra Charter and its guidelines. » The principles of Ask First and Free, Prior and Informed Consent will guide engagement with Aboriginal people to identify, conserve and interpret Aboriginal heritage. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians will be involved in managing Canberra Nature Park as a living cultural landscape. » Aboriginal cultural rights will be respected in accordance with the Human Rights Act 2004. OBJECTIVES » The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee works with PCS to guide management of Canberra Nature Park. » Cooperative management arrangements for Canberra Nature Park are established with Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. » Canberra Nature Park provides a venue to connect Aboriginal people to Country. » Aboriginal cultural values, including places and objects, are protected and conserved. » Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians are actively involved in conserving and interpreting Aboriginal cultural heritage. » Traditional knowledge is incorporated into reserve management to improve environmental and cultural outcomes. » Community awareness of Aboriginal cultural heritage and connection to Country is increased. » The cultural landscape values and Aboriginal history of the reserves are better understood and interpreted. » Canberra Nature Park reserves are jointly named with an appropriate name identified by Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians. Aboriginal Fire Management Framework The Parks and Conservation Service has an ACT Aboriginal Fire Management Framework as part of its commitments in the annual ACT Bushfire Operational Plans. The framework establishes a set of guidelines and principles for rejuvenation of cultural burning practices in the ACT. While the primary purpose is cultural renewal, other outcomes include the renewal of native vegetation, safeguarding culturally significant sites, hazard reduction and maintaining the health of groundwater sources and water catchment areas. Murumbung Yurung Murra Network Aboriginal staff work in various roles across the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate and come together as the Murumbung Yurung Murra Network for the purpose of peer support, mentoring and advocacy for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff within the directorate. Members of the network also participate in the delivery of cultural activities to assist with educating EPSDD staff and the broader community on the Aboriginal culture of the ACT. Environment.act.gov.au | 255.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 OTHER OBJECTIVES: To protect fragments of habitats as components of landscape or seascape-scale conservation strategies. 2.4 Habitat connectivity and wildlife movement Landscape connectivity Landscape connectivity has been mapped across Canberra Nature Park, and protection and focussed management (rehabilitation and assisted natural regeneration) and key restoration and linkage protection areas are required to support connectivity: 1. between Goorooyarroo and Mount Majura, and Mount Majura and the Military Training Area 2. from Black Mountain and Aranda Bushland, through Mount Painter and Pinnacle, to Kama Nature Reserve and Molonglo River corridor 3. from Mount Taylor to Cooleman Ridge and then onto McQuoids Hill and the Murrumbidgee River corridor 4. between Farrer Ridge and Mount Taylor 5. from Wanniassa Hills to woodland in the NSW area of Jerrabomberra 6. between Tuggeranong Hill and the Murrumbidgee River corridor. Complexes The 39 nature reserves of Canberra Nature Park have been grouped into ‘complexes’ with similar characteristics, management priorities and/or geographical proximity. This helps management take a landscape-scale perspective for strategic planning and operational programs. Native Woodland, Native Grassland and Aquatic Strategies Habitat connectivity will also be enhanced and protected through the application of the ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy, the ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy and the ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans. These strategies outline conservation goals objectives and actions for the long-term protection of the ecosystems in the ACT. 256 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 OTHER OBJECTIVES: To develop public education and appreciation of the species and/or habitats concerned. CH. 8 Community involvement POLICIES » The Parks and Conservation Service will support environmental education and interpretation activities across Canberra Nature Park to increase community understanding and stewardship of reserve values. » The Parks and Conservation Service will forge stronger partnerships and relationships with ParkCare and ‘Friends of‘ groups, catchment groups, and other volunteer groups, neighbours, Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians and Representative Aboriginal Organisations to increase community involvement in reserve management. OBJECTIVES » Connections between people and nature are created by providing multiple ways for people of all ages and cultures to learn and be inspired by nature. » Education and interpretation increase community understanding of reserve values and involvement in their protection. » Online information about the about natural, cultural and social values of Canberra Nature Park is readily accessible. » Canberra’s kindergarten and primary school students have access to nature-based learning activities in Canberra Nature Park. » Visitors are aware of and comply with legislation and policies that guide access to, and appropriate use of, Canberra Nature Park. » The knowledge and wisdom of Canberra’s community is harnessed to inform and enhance reserve management. » Community engagement programs and activities improve management outcomes for Canberra Nature Park. » Traditional Custodians and other local Aboriginal groups have increased involvement in land management and cultural activities. » Novel and diverse partnerships with private, corporate, NGO and government sectors contribute to the conservation of Canberra Nature Park and the environmental and socio- economic fabric of the ACT. ParkCare ParkCare groups have operated in Canberra Nature Park for over 30 years and make an important contribution to protecting and improving reserves, with volunteers devoting significant time and effort to conservation work. Seventeen ParkCare groups are currently active. Woodlands and Wetlands Trust The Woodlands and Wetlands Trust is governed by a board of community representatives with expertise in science, public administration, fundraising and outreach (established 2012). Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and Jerrabomberra Wetlands are managed in partnership between the community, government and private sectors to achieve improved ecosystem restoration, and through educational and eco-tourism opportunities inspire conservation values within the community of the Canberra region. Environment.act.gov.au | 257.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 OTHER OBJECTIVES: To provide a means by which the urban residents may obtain regular contact with nature. CH. 7 Nature-based experiences Active recreation in a natural environment Canberra Nature Park provides Canberra residents and visitors with opportunities for active recreation in a natural environment in close proximity to residential areas. Nature reserves are enjoyed for nature-based recreation including walking, running, bird watching, wildflower appreciation, orienteering, rogaining, cycling and mountain biking, dog walking, horse riding and geocaching. These activities form part of an active lifestyle and as a way of maintaining physical and social health, and align with the ACT Government Wellbeing Framework and Healthy Living initiative, and programs such as Find Fitness Outdoors and Healthy Parks Healthy People. POLICIES » Nature-based experiences, including recreation, health and tourism activities, will be encouraged and supported through the provision of contemporary facilities, programs and information. » Activities that are consistent with government initiatives and programs to encourage healthy and active living will be supported where appropriate within Canberra Nature Park. » Bins will not be provided in Canberra Nature Park nature reserves and visitors are required to remove all waste, including dog faeces. » The Parks and Conservation Service will regularly liaise with user groups and seek their input on decisions relating to activities and facilities. » Restrictions on dogs in all nature reserves will continue to apply, including retention of the ‘on leash’ requirement and restricting dogs to formal tracks and trails. » Approval for dog walking in some locations will be reviewed if dogs are found to be having a significant adverse impact on reserve values. » Cycling and mountain biking are not permitted on walking tracks. » Off-trail use of motorised vehicles in Molonglo Gorge and Kowen Escarpment is prohibited and their use on trails in the reserves will be reduced. » Consideration will be given to approving motorised vehicle use on management trails within Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve only where it is required to provide safe connections between areas of the broader Kowen Forest for an event. 258 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
IUCN Category IV: Habitat/ Species Management Area Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan 2021 OTHER OBJECTIVES: To provide a means by which the urban residents may obtain regular contact with nature. CH. 7 Nature-based experiences OBJECTIVES Nature-based recreation » The accessibility and amenity of Canberra Nature Park is enhanced and community enjoyment of nature and the benefits it provides is increased. » Residents and visitors have a greater appreciation of the natural and cultural values of Canberra Nature Park and the range of nature-based experiences available. » Newly arrived Canberrans and visitors are welcomed to Canberra Nature Park through enjoyable, culturally appropriate, interactive experiences that encourage regular visits. » Levels and types of visitor use are consistent with the conservation of natural and cultural heritage. » Park managers have a greater understanding of existing types and levels of recreation and visitor use. Nature-based health and wellbeing » Nature-based activities in Canberra Nature Park contribute to the improved emotional, physical, and spiritual health and well-being of our community. » Canberra Nature Park is valued for the health and well-being benefits it provides. Nature-based tourism/events » Tourism activities within Canberra Nature Park are primarily related to an appreciation of its natural and cultural values. » The potential for nature-based tourism activities in Canberra Nature Park is considered in the context of a strategic approach to visitor experience and ecotourism across ACT reserves, and conservation of the natural environment. Environment.act.gov.au | 259.
Appendix 4: Geological features of Canberra Nature Park Nature Reserve Geological features Black Mountain Early Silurian Black Mountain Sandstone (fine-grained quartz sandstone) can be seen at a viewing area car park about half way up the summit road and also along the road at cuttings (forming type locality). This is the only occurrence of this geology in the ACT and has led to a significantly richer shrub and herb flora than elsewhere in the ACT (Ryan 2011). Sandstone was used in the construction of St John’s Church and other early colonial buildings in Canberra (Finlayson 2008). Exposed Pittman Formation (type locality) can be found in a creek bed to the south of Black Mountain (National Capital Development Commission [NCDC] 1988). There is an Acton Shale member of the Pittman Formation on Caswell Drive road cuttings (NCDC 1988). Crace Grasslands Crace Hill exhibits a distinctive form known as a cuesta (one steep side and one sloping side) and is a locally important example of this landform exposing the Ainslie Volcanics dacitic lavas. Jointing of these rocks, and secondary deposition of limonite (a type of iron ore) and underlying shales and mudstone make Crace Hill an important site for geological education (NCDC 1988). Gossan Hill Gossan Hill has complex geology with different rock types present in a small area, which provides a valuable educational resource. There is an outcrop of a gossan, containing haematite, goethite and opaline silica. (Gossan, a Cornish word meaning ‘iron hat’, is a surface outcrop of mainly oxides of iron leached by hot ground water from surrounding rocks. The heat probably resulted from the nearby igneous intrusions.) Over the past 65 million years, the exposed area of the gossan has weathered, impregnating the surrounding soil with coloured ochres. The gossan outcrops were listed on the Register of National Estate (now phased out as a statutory list by the Commonwealth Government). A road-cut on College Street reveals sedimentary rock of the Ordovician Pittman Formation (about 445 million years old) consisting of folded, thin-bedded fine sandstone and shale with minor chert. A quartz porphyry (igneous rock with large quartz crystals of presumed Silurian age around 430–415 million years) intrudes into the Pittman Formation at both the eastern and western ends of the road cutting. The western slope of the hill contains excellent exposures, in erosion gullies, of Tertiary soil profiles, including buried soils and large ‘peds’, which are characteristic of very old soils (Geological Society of Australia 2013). Kowen Escarpment / Molonglo Gorge Rocks in the Kowen area were laid down as a series of sandstone, shale and siltstone deposits during the Late Ordovician (450 million years ago). The bedding became distorted due to faulting and folding. The escarpment has been uplifted along the north–south Queanbeyan Fault. This uplifting was relatively recent, caused by movements of the Queanbeyan Fault during the Late Tertiary or early Quaternary (2–4 million years ago). The escarpment is the clearest example of a young fault scarp in the ACT (National Capital Planning Authority 1990). Molonglo Gorge is an outstanding locality to study the physical characteristics and structure of bedded sediments. It includes the most continuous exposure of Pittman Formation and the most extensive accessible valley floor exposure of sedimentary rocks in the ACT. The recent nature of faulting is illustrated by the well-defined scarp extending north and south of the river, and by hanging valleys where downcutting by tributaries has not kept pace with the rate of incision of the Molonglo Gorge (National Capital Planning Authority 1990). 260 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
Nature Reserve Geological features Mount Ainslie Early Silurian Mount Ainslie Volcanics within the Hawkins Volcanic Suite can be seen in cuttings on the summit road and at the summit lookout (Finlayson 2008). Quarry on the southern slopes represents an excellent exposure of the major rock type of the Mount Ainslie Volcanics (Owen 1988). Mount Ainslie Volcanics rocky outcrops are on the low ridge immediately north of the War Memorial (NCDC 1988). Mount Majura Fossil outcrops are found on the lower north-west slopes including corals, trilobites and brachiopods (NCDC 1988). Mount Mugga Mugga The Hindmarsh Drive road cutting (between Mount Mugga Mugga and Red Hill nature reserves) displays a long and complex geological section, intersecting volcanic and sedimentary units of the Mount Painter and the Deakin Volcanics (NCDC 1988). The disused Mugga Mugga quarry (excluded from, but surrounded by, the nature reserve) is mid- Silurian Mugga Mugga Porphyry rock (member of the Deakin Volcanics), which is a characteristic dark blue-grey rhyodacite porphyry (containing large crystals) that has been widely used throughout the Canberra region, for example as road metal (Finlayson 2008). It is the type locality of the Mugga Mugga Porphyry (Owen 1988). Mount Painter Rocky outcrops of Mount Painter Volcanics (type locality) are a Middle Silurian formation of dark coloured porphyry rock with inclusion (xenoliths) of other rocks and large quartz fragments (NCDC 1988). Mulligans Flat The extensive outcrop of reef quartz is an outstanding example of quartz intrusion along a fault zone (NCDC 1988). Oakey Hill / Mount Taylor These road cuttings along the Tuggeranong Parkway at Oakey Hill/Mount Taylor exposes dacitic ash flows and interbedded water lain sediments in the lower part of the Deakin Volcanics (Geological Society of Australia 2013). This area is significant for the interpretation of the volcanic stratigraphy of the Canberra area during the Silurian period (around 400 million years ago). O’Connor Ridge Ginninderra Drive cuttings expose the Ordovician Pittman Formation (NCDC 1988). Percival Hill Percival Hill derives from Black Mountain sandstone from marine deposition. Red Hill Hornfels exposures (within mid-Silurian Yarralumla Formation) near the summit of Red Hill are of geological interest and educational value. The Hindmarsh Drive road cutting (between Mount Mugga Mugga and Red Hill nature reserves) displays a long and complex geological section, intersecting with volcanic and sedimentary units of the Mount Painter and Deakin Volcanics (NCDC 1988). Note: While geological feature exposed in road cuttings may be outside reserve boundaries, they provide an understanding of the underlying geology of the adjacent nature reserve/s. Environment.act.gov.au | 261.
Glossary Activities Declaration Activities Declarations are Notifiable Instruments made under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. The Conservator may make an Activities Declaration stating that certain activities are prohibited and must not be carried out in reserves or are restricted and may be carried out only if directions or requirements are complied with. In deciding whether to make an Activities Declaration for a reserve, the conservator must consider the reserve management plan for the reserve. A notice about the declaration must be displayed at the reserve. It is an offence to contravene a declaration and penalties apply. Current information on Activities Declarations can be accessed at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2014-59/. anthropogenic Anthropogenic means substances, processes, etc. of human origin or resulting from human activity (Dictionary of Ecology, 5th Edition http://www.oxfordreference.com/). bicycle In the ACT, a bicycle1 means a vehicle with two or more wheels that is built to be propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears (whether or not it has an auxiliary motor). The definition includes a power-assisted pedal cycle but excludes any vehicle that has an internal combustion engine. A power assisted pedal cycle2 is defined as: » a pedal cycle to which is attached one or more auxiliary propulsion motors having a combined maximum power output not exceeding 200 watts or » a Pedalec (A pedalec3 is a power-assisted pedal cycle that may have one or more auxiliary propulsion motors generating a combined continuous rated power output not exceeding 250 watts. Pedalecs are designed to give riders assistance, but only when they are actually pedalling). In summary, bicycles include power-assisted pedal cycles that generate up to 200 watts and pedalecs that generate up to 250 watts. A pedalec is also a power-assisted pedal cycle. 1 See Road Transport (General) Act 1999. 2 See Vehicle Standard (Australian Design Rule-Definitions and Vehicle Categories) 2005. These are vehicle standards determined under the Road Vehicle Standards Act 2018 (Cwlth). 3 See European Committee for Standardization EN 15194:2009 or EN 15194:2009+A1:2011 Cycles – Electrically power assisted cycles – EPAC Bicycles. biodiversity Biodiversity is the variety of all life forms on earth: it is the different plants, animals and micro-organisms, their genes, and the terrestrial, marine and freshwater ecosystems of which they are a part. conservation When applied to natural heritage, conservation means all the processes and actions of looking after a place so as to retain its natural significance and always includes protection, maintenance and monitoring. It may also involve actions to repair degradation and includes conserving natural processes of change (Australian Natural Heritage Charter 2002). When applied to species and ecological communities, conservation refers to all the processes and actions aimed at the maintenance of those entities in perpetuity. This is also expressed as the ‘conservation of biological diversity’. When applied to cultural heritage, conservation means all the processes of looking after a place so as to retain its cultural significance. Cultural significance means aesthetic, scientific, social or spiritual value for past, present or future generations (Australian Heritage Commission, 2013). Conservation may also be applied to specific objects. 262 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
C3 and C4 native grass Perennial grasses can be classified as either C3 or C4 plants. These terms refer to the different pathways that plants use to capture carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. All species have the more primitive C3 pathway, but the additional C4 pathway evolved in species in the wet and dry tropics. The first product of carbon fixation in C3 plants involves a 3-carbon molecule, while C4 plants initially produce a 4-carbon molecule that then enters the C3 cycle. These differences are important because the two pathways are also associated with different growth requirements. C3 plants are adapted to cool season establishment and growth in either wet or dry environments. C4 plants are more adapted to warm or hot seasonal conditions under moist or dry environments. (NSW Department of Primary Industries http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/agriculture/pastures-and-rangelands/native- pastures/what-are-c3-and-c4-native-grass). designated areas Designated areas are areas identified by the National Capital Authority as “having the special characteristics of the National Capital” and are protected from development. ecosystem An ecosystem is a community of interacting living organisms and their physical environment, linked together through nutrient cycles and energy flows. enhancement When applied to ecosystems, enhancement means adding organisms, genotypes, species or elements of habitat or geodiversity to those that naturally exist in a place (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). When applied generally, enhancement means raising to a higher degree; intensifying; magnifying; raising the value of, and is used to describe partial restoration measures (Macquarie Dictionary). heterogeneity Heterogeneity means different in kind, unlike; composed of parts of different kinds; having widely unlike elements or constituents; not homogeneous (Macquarie Dictionary). informal tracks Informal tracks have been formed by repeated recreational use. These tracks do not meet professional track specifications and may cause environmental damage such as erosion or impact on threatened species. IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature) IUCN is a membership Union composed of both government and civil society organisations with a mission to influence, encourage and assist societies to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable. IUCN has developed an internationally recognised classification for protected areas which assigns them to categories according to their management objectives. IUCN protected area categories are: Ia Strict Nature Reserve; Ib Wilderness Area; II National Park; III Natural Monument or Feature; IV Habitat/Species Management Area; V Protected Landscape/ Seascape; and VI Protected area with sustainable use of natural resources. maintenance Maintenance means the continuous protective care of the biodiversity and geodiversity of a place (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). Environment.act.gov.au | 263.
management trails Management trails have been designed and constructed for use by vehicles (management only) to meet the required standards for their purpose. They are used by the Parks and Conservation Service and Rural Fire Service for park management activities. These trails are also used by public utilities or other service providers for the construction, repair or maintenance of infrastructure. modification Modification means altering a place to suit proposed uses that are compatible with the natural significance of the place (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). monitoring Monitoring means ongoing review, evaluation and assessment to detect changes in the natural integrity of a place, with reference to a baseline condition (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). Monitoring involves assessing the characteristics of something over a period of time, and will often involve repeatedly counting, measuring and/or assessing a variable or variables. It is only fully effective when a standardised method is used each time. Monitoring is focused on baseline conditions and long-term trends. multi-use tracks Multi-use tracks have been designed and constructed for both walking and mountain biking. These tracks are maintained by the Parks and Conservation Service, sometimes with support from ParkCare volunteers. The tracks generally meet the Class 3 walking track standard, and follow best practice for mountain bike tracks for attributes such as slope, alignment and drainage. Natural Temperate Grassland Natural Temperate Grassland is listed as a critically endangered ecological community in the ACT under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. This community forms part of the Natural Temperate Grassland of the South Eastern Highlands (NSW and ACT) ecological community, which has been listed nationally as critically endangered. NGO non government organisation preservation Preservation means maintaining biodiversity of a place at the existing stage of succession, or maintaining existing geodiversity (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). protection Protection means taking care of a place by managing impacts to ensure that natural significance is retained (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). rare and uncommon plant species Rare and uncommon plant species are those known from five or fewer ACT locations. refugia Refugia are isolated areas where extensive changes—most typically due to changing climate—have not occurred. Plants and animals formerly characteristic of the region in general find a refuge from unfavourable conditions in these areas (Dictionary of Ecology, 5th Edition). regeneration Regeneration means the natural recovery of natural integrity following disturbance or degradation (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). 264 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
rehabilitation Rehabilitation refers to the improvement in condition of land and/or ecological communities and their component species following degrading disturbance. Rehabilitation may involve regeneration, restoration or reinstatement, representing progressively greater degrees of human intervention (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). reinstatement Reinstatement means to introduce to a place one or more species or elements of habitat or geodiversity that are known to have existed there naturally at a previous time, but that can no longer be found at that place (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). Representative Aboriginal Organisations Representative Aboriginal Organisations are declared under the Heritage Act 2004 and are consulted about the identification and management of Aboriginal cultural places and objects in the ACT. research Research involves systematic investigations into a significant question (usually deriving from an established discipline) or ‘problem’ with the aim of establishing new knowledge. It is conducted over a period of time, may involve the investigation of relationships between variables and varying levels of analysis, and will be related to the philosophical and theoretical foundations of a discipline. Research can involve survey and monitoring. restoration Restoration means returning existing habitats to a known past state or to an approximation of the natural condition by repairing degradation, by removing introduced species or by reinstatement (Australian Heritage Commission, 2002b). survey Survey involves establishing the characteristics (or baseline condition) of something in a comprehensive or general way—a building, the vegetation of an area, or a group of people. It often involves counting, measuring and/or assessing a variable or variables. Traditional Custodians Traditional Custodians are descendants of the original inhabitants of a place and have continuing spiritual, cultural, political and often physical connection to the land. walking tracks Walking tracks have been designed and constructed and generally lead to special features, such as scenic views. Walking tracks are maintained by the Parks and Conservation Service, sometimes with support from ParkCare volunteers. Walking tracks generally meet Class 3 of Australian Standard AS 2156.122001 Walking Tracks– Classification and Signage. Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland is listed as a critically endangered ecological community in the ACT under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. This community forms part of the White Box–Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland ecological community, which has been listed as critically endangered under the Commonwealth’s Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. Environment.act.gov.au | 265.
References ACT Government 2004. Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. Action Plan No. 27. Environment ACT, Canberra. ACT Government 2009. ACT Weeds Strategy 2009–2019 Department of the Environment, Climate Change, Energy and Water, Canberra. ACT Government 2009b. Survey of vegetation and habitat in key riparian zones: Murrumbidgee River, ACT. Technical Report 22. Department of Territory and Municipal Services, Canberra. ACT Government 2011. Survey of vegetation and habitat in key riparian zones of tributaries of the Murrumbidgee River in the ACT: Naas, Gudgenby, Paddys, Cotter and Molonglo Rivers. Technical Report 23. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2012. ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy 2012–2022. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2013a. Duntroon Dairy: conservation management plan. Territory and Municipal Services Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2013b. ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23. Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2015a. Best Practice Management Guide for Rabbits in the ACT. Environment and Planning Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2015b. Trails ACT Planning and Management Guidelines 2015–2025. Territory and Municipal Services Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2016. Code of Practice for Beekeeping in Residential Areas of the ACT 2016. Territory and Municipal Services Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2017a. ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2017b. Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2017c. Contaminated Sites Environment Protection Policy. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2017d. Action Plan. Pink-tailed Worm-lizard Aprasia parapulchella. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2018. ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2019a. ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2019b. ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–2025. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. 266 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
ACT Government 2019c. Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2019d. The Canberra Dog Model: Responsible dog ownership for a safer, more pet-friendly community. Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2020. ACT Wellbeing Framework. Treasury and Economic Development Directorate, Canberra. https://www.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1498198/ACT-wellbeing-framework.pdf ACT Government 2021a. Urban Forest Strategy 2021–2045. Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2021b. The ACT Cat Plan 2021–31. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. ACT Government 2021c. ACT Cat Plan Implementation Plan. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. Australian Heritage Commission 1998. Protecting local heritage places: a guide for communities. Australian Heritage Commission, Canberra. Australia ICOMOS 2013. The Burra Charter: The Australia ICOMOS Charter for Places of Cultural Significance. Deakin University, Burwood. http://australia.icomos.org/wp-content/uploads/The-Burra-Charter-2013- Adopted-31.10.2013.pdf. Australian Heritage Commission 2002a. Ask First: A guide to respecting Indigenous heritage places and values. Australian Heritage Commission, Canberra. Australian Heritage Commission 2002b. Australian Natural Heritage Charter for the conservation of places of natural heritage significance, 2nd edition. Australian Heritage Commission, Canberra. Barrat DG 1997. ‘Predation by house cats, Felis catus (L.) in Canberra, Australia. I. Prey composition and preference’, Wildlife Research 24: 263–277. Barratt DG 1998. ‘Predation by house cats, Felis catus (L.), in Canberra, Australia. II. Factors affecting the amount of prey caught and estimates of the impact on wildlife’, Wildlife Research 25: 475–487. Barton PS, Manning AD, Gibb H, Lindenmayer DB and Cunningham SA 2009. ‘Conserving ground-dwelling beetles in an endangered woodland community: multi-scale habitat effects on assemblage diversity’. Biological Conservation 142:1701–1709. Barrett T and Love J 2012. Fine Scale Fauna Habitat and Connectivity Values in the ACT Region. A report prepared for Conservation Research, Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. Berry SL and Roderick ML 2005. ‘Changing Australian vegetation from 1788 to 1988: effects of CO2 and land-use change’. Australian Journal of Botany 54(4):325–338. Bond S 2019. The Small Ant-blue butterfly Acrodipsas myrmecophila (Waterhouse and Lyell, 1913) in the ACT. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. Commonwealth of Australia 2016. Natural Temperate Grassland of the South Eastern Highlands: a nationally protected ecological community. Canberra Ornithologists Group http://canberrabirds.org.au/. Canberra Nature Map https://canberra.naturemapr.org/ Environment.act.gov.au | 267.
Cooper, M and ACT Government 2011. Report on Canberra Nature Park (nature reserves); Molonglo River Corridor (nature reserves) and Googong Foreshores investigation. Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Canberra. Cowood AL, Lynch AJJ and Botha J 2018. Blakely’s Red Gum dieback in the ACT: report to ACT Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra, Canberra. Doerr V, Doerr E and Davies M 2010. Does structural connectivity facilitate dispersal of native species in Australia’s fragmented terrestrial landscapes? CEE review 08-007 (SR44). Collaboration for Environmental Evidence: www.environmentalevidence.org/SR44.html. Doerr V, Williams K, Drielsma M, Doerr E, Davies M, Love J, Langston A, Low Choy S, Manion G, Cawsey M, McGinness H, Jovanovic T, Crawford D, Austin M and Ferrier S 2013. Designing landscapes for biodiversity under climate change: final report. National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility Gold Coast pp. 276. Devlin K 1999. Conserving native fauna in urban reserves: a spatial analysis of small mammal habitat using GIS. Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra. Eyles K and Mulvaney M 2013. Responsible pet ownership and the protection of wildlife: Options for improving the management of cats in the ACT. A Background Paper prepared for the ACT Responsible Cat Ownership Steering Committee. Farrow R 2012. Devising a survey method for the vulnerable Perunga grasshopper in the ACT including a determination of its habitat preferences so that habitat can be used as a surrogate for its potential occurrence. A report prepared for the Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, Canberra. Frogwatch 2009. ACT and Region Community Frogwatch Census Report. Ginninderra Catchment Group, Canberra. Grarock K, Tidemann CR, Wood J and Lindenmayer DB 2012. ‘Is It Benign or Is It a Pariah? Empirical Evidence for the Impact of the Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis) on Australian Birds’. PLoS ONE 7(7):e40622. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0040622. Howland B, Stojanovic D, Gordon I, Manning A, Fletcher D and Lindenmayer D 2014. ‘Eaten out of house and home: impacts of grazing on ground-dwelling reptiles in Australian grasslands and grassy woodlands.’ PLoS ONE 9.12: e105966. Howland B, Stojanovic D, Gordon I, Radford J, Manning A and Lindenmayer D 2016a. ‘Birds of a feather flock together: using trait-groups to understand the effect of macropod grazing on birds in grassy habitats.’ Biological Conservation 194: 89–99. Howland B, Stojanovic D, Gordon I, Fletcher D, Snape M, Stirnemann I and Lindenmayer D 2016b. ‘Habitat preference of the striped legless lizard: Implications of grazing by native herbivores and livestock for conservation of grassland biota.’ Austral Ecology 41.4: 455–464. Hughes L and Steffen W 2014. Be Prepared: Climate Change and the ACT Bushfire Threat. Climate Council of Australia, Canberra. Kukolic K 1990. A survey of the vertebrate fauna of Mount Ainslie, Mount Majura and Black Mountain 1975–76. ACT Government, Canberra. Lynch AJJ, Botha J, Johnston L, Peden L, Seddon, J and Corrigan T 2018. Managing a complex problem: Blakely’s Red Gum Dieback in the ACT. In Smith, R (Ed.). Proceedings of Restore, Regenerate, Revegetate: A Conference on Restoring Ecological Processes, Ecosystems and Landscapes in a Changing World, held at the University of New England, Armidale, 5–9 February 2017. 268 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
MacKenzie JB, Baines G, Johnston L and Seddon J 2019. Identifying biodiversity refugia under climate change in the ACT and region. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. Manning AD, Wood JT, Cunningham RB, McIntyre S, Shorthouse D J, Gordon IJ and Lindenmayer DB 2011. ‘Integrating research and restoration: the establishment of a long-term woodland experiment in south-eastern Australia’. Australian Zoologist 35(3):633–648. Manning AD, Cunningham RB and Lindenmayer DB 2013. ‘Bringing forward the benefits of coarse woody debris in ecosystem recovery under different levels of grazing and vegetation density’. Biological Conservation 157:204–214. Manning AD, Rayner L, Tingabao X, and Hutchinson MF (in review). ‘Modelling of the projected bioclimatic domains of the Superb Parrot under Past, Present and Future scenarios’. MARS (Market Attitude Research Services) 2016. ACT Sportsgrounds, Parks and Open Spaces Usage and Satisfaction Survey. Department of Territory and Municipal Services, Canberra. Murray Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations 2007. Echuca Declaration https://www.mldrin.org.au/what-we-do/cultural-flows/. Muir C, Rose D and Sullivan P 2010. ‘From the other side of the knowledge frontier: Indigenous knowledge, social- ecological relationships and new perspectives’. The Rangeland Journal 32:259265. National Capital Development Commission 1988. Sites of significance in the ACT. Technical Paper 56. National Capital Development Commission, Canberra. NSW Office of Environment and Heritage 2011. Plant Communities of the South Eastern Highlands and Australian Alps within the Murrumbidgee Catchment of New South Wales. Version 1.1. Technical Report. A Report to Catchment Action NSW. NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, Department of Premier and Cabinet, Queanbeyan. NSW Scientific Committee 1998. Predation by the European Red Fox Vulpes vulpes—a Key Threatening Process. NSW Office of Environment and Heritage https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedSpeciesApp/profile. aspx?id=20015 Thunderstone 2019. Ngunnawal People https://www.thunderstone.net.au/ngunawal-people. Paton D and O’Connor J 2010. ‘The State of Australia’s Birds 2009: Restoring woodland habitats for birds’. Supplement to Wingspan 20 (1). Birds Australia. Pennay M 2013. ACT Batwatch—A citizen scientist project https://prezi.com/vhiwthtgph8m/actbatwatch/. Richter A, Osborne W and Traugott M 2011. Dietary specialisation in the Golden Sun Moth Synemon plana—the key to understanding habitat requirements and site rehabilitation for this critically endangered species. Final report to Biodiversity Policy and Programs Branch. Victorian Department of Sustainability and Environment. Robertson P and Evans M 2010. National Recovery Plan for the Grassland Earless Dragon (Tympanocryptis lineata). ACT Government, Canberra. Ryan S 2011. History of Canberra Nature Park. Report for the ACT Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Canberra. Sharp SB 2011. Landscape function in Canberra Nature Park and impacts of threatening processes on landscape function. Report for the ACT Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Canberra. Environment.act.gov.au | 269.
Shorthouse D, Daniel I, Jeffress S, Lane S, Mills P, Woodbridge G, McIntyre S, and Manning A 2012. ‘The ‘making of’ the Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo experimental restoration project’. Ecological Management and Restoration 13(2) May 2012. Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch 2017. Catchment Health Indicator Program 2016–17 https://www.act.waterwatch.org.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/1446676/catchment-health-indicator- program-report-2016-17.pdf. Webb B 2011. Impacts of Climate on the Canberra Nature Park: Risks and Responses. Report for the ACT Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Canberra. Wildlife Atlas of the ACT https://www.data.act.gov.au/Environment/ACT-Wildlife-Atlas-Records/e9ux-7djy. 270 | CANBERRA NATURE PARK RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021.
RESERVE MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021 CANBERRA NATURE PARK ACT Government logo and ACT Parks and Conservation Logo.
.
ACT STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT 2019 Ngunnawal Country.
 Aunty Loretta Halloran is a Ngunnawal Elder and a member of the United Ngunnawal Council of Elders. Aunty Loretta is the creator of the pot photographed above, a detail of which is reproduced on the front cover of this State of the Environment Report 2019. Through her daughter Caroline Hughes, she has given us permission to reproduce these photographs. This pottery represents the Ngunnawal river systems: the water which flows and the rocky surfaces through which the water courses. Aunty Loretta has been working in clay for many years. Aunty Loretta was born in Yass and spent her early life on the Hollywood Mission. She spent time away from home in Wurundjeri country (Melbourne) before returning to live on the borders of Wiradjuri and Ngunnawal country at Tumut. She has been pivotal in the movement to bring back the Ngunnawal language, working with her community, the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, and with responsible non-Aboriginal authorities. Aunty Loretta remembers the trying conditions under which her family and community lived on the Missions but she also remembers the passing on of cultural knowledge. She is now a critical contributor to communicating culture. She recalls her father taking the children around to all the rabbit traps that he had set, barefoot on the frosty mornings, and she remembers helping him skin them. She recalls him fishing late in the evening ‘when the fish get sleepy’. As children they weren’t allowed to make any noise. The fish would come in closer to the bank, and her father would reach down with his hand and scoop them out onto the banks. ‘He was so fast with his hands. We’d make a fire amongst the rocks and cook the fish’. Her father taught her about the stars and the moon and the trees. He said the trees ‘talk to each other, they connect with each other’. A lot of that knowledge is coming back to her, just like the language … ‘it’s coming back’. ‘People always said, as you get older you’ll start remembering the language. And it’s true, I’ll be walking around, and a word comes into my head. It’s wonderful.’ A special thank you to Caroline Hughes, Ngunnawal elder, who made it possible for us to use her mother Aunty Loretta Halloran’s pottery for the cover art work. These photographs were taken by David Appleton, Photography and Technology Officer, Creative Industries, College of Technology and Design, Canberra Institute of Technology. The photo shoot was organised by Jayne Miller, Director, Business Growth and Transformation Canberra Institute of Technology. © Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment ISBN 978-0-6487496-0-8 With the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms and where otherwise noted, all material presented in this document is provided under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia licence (http:// creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/3.0/au/). The details of the relevant licence conditions are available on the Creative Commons website (accessible using the links provided), as is the full legal code for the CC BY 3.0 AU licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by/3.0/au/legalcode). Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2019, ACT State of the Environment 2019, Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Canberra. Published by the Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Canberra, 2019. This document is available online at www.environmentcommissioner.act.gov.au For further information, contact: Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment GPO Box 158, Canberra ACT 2601 Telephone: (02) 6207 2626 Facsimile: (02) 6207 2630 Email: envcomm@act.gov.au Website: www.environmentcommissioner.act.gov.au This report is printed on 100% recycled paper. The ACT Government is committed to making its information, services, events and venues accessible to as many people as possible. If you have difficulty reading a standard printed document and would like to receive this publication in an alternative format – such as large print and audio – please call the Canberra Blind Society on (02) 6247 4580. If English is not your first language and you require the translating and interpreting service, please call the Telephone Interpreter Service on 131 450. If you are deaf or hearing impaired and require assistance, please call the National Relay Service on 133 677. Graphic design: CRE8IVE Typesetting: Keep Creative.
ACT STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT 2019 Ngunnawal Country.
TC ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report TABLE OF CONTENTS FOREWORD 04 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 08 RECOMMENDATIONS 14 Overarching recommendations 15 Indigenous matters 15 Sustainability leadership and citizen science 15 Urban trees 15 Climate change 16 Human settlements 16 Air 16 Land 16 Biodiversity 16 Water 17 Fire 17 01 CONTEXT 18 The climate emergency – the globe, the climate and ecosystem service depletion 19 Canberra and the ACT – the environment and its challenges 21 The contents of this report 27 02 NGUNNAWAL COUNTRY 28 Recommendations 29 Ngunnawal Country of the ACT 29 Ngunnawal Cultural Heritage 32 Water: cultural water and Indigenous management 35 Land: Cultural – cool – burning on Country 41 Cultural Indicators: a proposal for Ngunnawal Country 46 03 COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP IN SUSTAINABILITY AND SCIENCE 48 Recommendations 49 Introduction 49 The value of environmental sustainability action in the ACT 50 Young people make a contribution 53 Older people make a contribution 55 Activism, advocacy and agency 56 Environmental sustainability: variety and activity in cities 59 Natural Resource Management (NRM) 61 Citizen science – science, the public and the environment 70 Citizen science – the arrival of the digital 75 04 URBAN TREES IN THE ACT – NATURE IN THE CITY 78 Recommendations 79 Urban trees in Canberra 79 Benefits of urban trees 80 Urban trees 84 ACT initiatives from 2015 to 2019 84 Safe and useful lives of trees 85 Urban development pressures 85 Climate change pressures and implications 87 The lives of trees in Canberra 93 Maintaining trees in Canberra 93 Tree Protection and the Tree Register 94 The future – Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City 96 02.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 05 INDICATORS, CONDITION AND TRENDS 98 5.1 Climate change 100 5.2 Human settlements 122 5.3 Air 168 5.4 Land 184 5.5 Biodiversity 204 5.6 Water 274 5.7 Fire 314 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES IN THE ACT 328 Introduction 329 Climate change 337 Waste 345 Air 352 Land 353 Biodiversity 357 Water 368 Fire 374 03.
FW ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report FOREWORD ‘The average global temperature for 2015–2019 is on track to be the warmest of any equivalent period on record. It is currently estimated to be 1.1 °Celsius (± 0.1 °C) above pre-industrial (1850–1900) times. Widespread and long-lasting heatwaves, record-breaking fires and other devastating events such as tropical cyclones, floods and drought have had major impacts on socio-economic development and the environment … Global emissions are not estimated to peak by 2030, let alone by 2020, if current climate policies and ambition levels of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) are maintained.’1 1 United Nations (UN) Science Advisory Group to the UN Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit, 22 September 2019, Press Release on the United in Science report, found at https:// unfccc.int/news/landmark-united-in-science-report-informs-climate-action-summit accessed 7 November 2019. 04 © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report In May 2019 the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) Government joined hundreds of other jurisdictions, including the United Kingdom and Canada, in becoming the first Australian territory or state to declare a climate emergency. The importance of this declaration has been reinforced in every major report released in 2019.2 Business has renewed calls for action,3 specifically citing the role that cities can play.4 The insurance industry echoes these concerns, with the global reinsurance company Munich RE putting climate change at the top of its 2018 Corporate Responsibility Report ‘materiality matrix’. Legal advice to company directors issued in 2016 on climate change risk was renewed in 2019.5 Defence experts keep reminding us of the security risks and commitment of personnel associated with climate change,6 and that climate change ‘…could exceed a more traditional regional military threat’.7 In November 2019, 11,000 scientists warned about the climate crisis.8 2 United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., eds, 2018, Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 °C, IPCC, Geneva, found at https://report.ipcc.ch/sr15/pdf/sr15_spm_final.pdf , accessed 7 November 2019; Brondizio E.S. et al., eds, 2019, Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services: Summary for Policymakers, IPBES Secretariat, Bonn, found at https://www.ipbes.net/global-assessment-report-biodiversity-ecosystem-services, accessed 7 November 2019; UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), 2019, The State of the World’s Biodiversity for Food and Agriculture, found at http://www.fao.org/3/CA3129EN/CA3129EN.pdf, accessed 7 November 2019; IPCC Climate Change and Land Report found at https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl-report-download-page/ accessed 7 November 2019; IPCC, 2019, Special Report on the Ocean and the Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, found at https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/home/, accessed 7 November 2019; UN Science Advisory Group to the UN Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit, 2019, United in Science: High-level Synthesis Report of Latest Climate Science Information, World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and Science Advisory Group of the UN, found at https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/climsci.pdf , accessed 30 October 2019; UNEP, Emissions Gap Report, 2019, found at https://wedocs.unep.org/ accessed on 27 November 2019; WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, 2019, found at https://library.wmo.int/ accessed on 27 November 2019. 3 Global Commission on Adaptation, 2019, Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience, found at https://cdn. gca.org/assets/2019-09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf , accessed 7 November 2019; United Nations Press Release, 22 September 2019, ‘87 Major Companies Lead the Way Towards a 1.5 °C Future at UN Climate Action Summit’, found at https://unfccc.int/news/87-major-companies-lead-the-way-towards-a-15degc-future-at-un-climate-action-summit, accessed 7 November 2019. 4 Goldman Sachs, Global Markets Institute, 2019, Taking the Heat: Making Cities Resilient to Climate Change, found at https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/gs-research/taking-the-heat/report.pdf , accessed 7 November 2019; Storrow, B., 25 November 2019, Cities Look to Natural Gas Bans to Curb Carbon Emissions, American Scientist, found at https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/cities-look-to-natural-gas-bans-to-curb-carbon-emissions/ accessed 28 November 2019. 5 Hutley, N. and S.H. Davison, 29 March 2019, ‘Updated Opinion on Directors’ Duties and Climate Risk’, Centre for Policy Development, found at https://cpd.org.au/2019/03/directors-duties-2019/, accessed 12 November 2019. 6 Clarke, M., 25 September 2019, ‘Did He Say it or Not? Defence Chief’s Climate Speech Warns of ‘Serious Ramifications of Climate Change’, ABC News, found at https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-09-25/australian-defence-force-angus-campbell- climate-change-speech/11543464 accessed 25 September 2019.
 7 Vice Admiral (Retired) Paul Maddison, Director of the UNSW Defence Research Institute, Canberra, personal comment made to Kate Auty, UNSW, 9 August 2019; Sturrock, R. and P. Ferguson, 2015, The Longest Conflict: Australian Climate Security Challenge, Centre for Policy Development, found at https://cpd.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Climate-Change-and-Security-Pap er-FINAL.pdf accessed 12 November 2019. 8 Ripple, W. J. et al., 2019, ‘World Scientists’ Warning of a Climate Emergency’, BioScience, biz088, found at https://academic.oup.com/bioscience/advance-article/doi/10.1093/biosci/biz088/5610806, accessed 7 November 2019. 9 UN Environment Programme (UNEP), 2019, Measuring Progress: Towards Achieving the Environmental Dimension of the SDGs, found at https://www.unenvironment.org/resources/report/measuring-progress-towards-achieving-environmental-dimension-sdgs, accessed 14 November 2019. 10 It will be interesting to watch the progress of SDG Indicator development and implementation in the next reporting period, but at this time I have not been persuaded to embark on an SDG indicators assessment as to do so would not improve on the data and trend analysis used in this State of the Environment Report. In this reporting period, in 2015, the United Nations also established the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with their 169 targets: 93 indicators relate to environmental matters, of which 30% still lack an agreed methodology.9 Responsible consumption and production (SDG 12) is characterised by the least data availability and has the lowest priority on countries’ Voluntary National Reviews. In respect of all the targets for the state of the environment – biodiversity, ecosystem health, pollution and waste – either ‘no data exists or no progress was made’. As we would expect, policy change, improved reporting, and increased funding has underpinned the success of other SDGs and United Nations’ recommendations call for resourcing, monitoring and analysis, development of indicator methodologies, building integrated capacity and reducing data fragmentation.10 05 Foreword.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The Canberra community understands these issues. In 2018, 90% of the community knew it was ‘important’ to act on climate change.11 Across Australia, in 2019, the Lowy Institute reported 61% of the community accepted that ‘global warming is a serious and pressing problem’.12 In this reporting period there have been many environmental and sustainability achievements in the ACT. Our commitment to, and imminent achievement of, 100% renewable energy is respected by thoughtful sub-national governments. This leadership has created green jobs and some confidence in our ability to achieve a ‘just transition’. The community and ACT Government can build on this accomplishment with the 2019 Climate Change Strategy.13 The ACT Government has been actively consulting with the public on major environmental policy directions, including the Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City 2019,14 the Planning Strategy 2018, the Canberra Nature Park Draft Reserve Management Plan 2019,15 Moving Canberra 2019–2045: Integrated Transport Strategy,16 the Draft Digital Strategy17 and the design of the ACT Wellbeing Framework.18 The Government has also updated its Communications and Engagement Plan19 and established a YourSay Community Panel. The first Independent Audits of the Gungahlin and Molonglo Valley Strategic 11 Schirmer, J. and B. Yabsley, 2018, Living Well with a Changing Climate: Findings of the 2018 ACT Longitudinal Survey on Climate Change, University of Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/1316521/Longitudin al-Survey-ACT-Resilience-to-Climate-Change-Report.pdf, accessed 12 September 2019. 12 Lowy Institute Poll, 2019, Australian Opinion on Climate Change and Energy, found at https://lowyinstitutepoll.lowyinstitute.org/ themes/climate-change-and-energy/ accessed 12 November 2019. 13 Found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cc/act-climate-change-strategy, accessed 28 November 2019. 14 Found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1413770/Canberras-Living-Infrastructure-Plan.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 15 Found at https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/act-parks/canberra-nature-park, accessed 18 November 2019. 16 Found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/7715/4508/8347/INTEGRATED_ TRANSPORT_STRATEGY_-_181514.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 17 Found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/2315/6920/3414/Draft_ACT_ Government_Digital_Strategy.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 18 Found at https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/wellbeing, accessed 18 November 2019. 19 Found at https://www.act.gov.au/yoursay/our-conversations accessed on 18 November 2019. 20 Treasury and Economic Development Directorate, 2019, ACT Population Projections 2018 to 2058, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://apps.treasury.act.gov.au/__data/assets/word_doc/0006/1305582/ACT-Population-Projections-Paper-FINAL. doc, accessed 30 October 2019. 21 OCSE, 2018, Independent Audit of the Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-molonglo-valley-strategic-assessment; OCSE, 2018, Independent Audit of the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-gungahlin-strategic-assessment 22 OCSE, 2019, The Heroic and the Dammed – Lower Cotter Catchment Restoration Evaluation, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/the-heroic-and-the-dammed-lower-cotter-catchment-restoration-evaluation 23 Infrastructure Australia, 2019, Urban Transport Crowding and Congestion, Supplementary Report to the Australian Infrastructure Audit 2019: 160, found at https://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/publications/urban-transport-crowding-and-congestion, accessed 30 October 2019.
 Assessments on Matters of National Environmental Significance (MNES) under the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 were conducted by this office (Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, OCSE) and recommendations and corrective actions have been adopted. A Chief Engineer and new ACT Government Architect have been appointed, supported by a Design Review Panel and ongoing funding has been committed in respect of environmental NGOs. Serious challenges to environmental management remain. Our population is expected to exceed 450,000 by 2022.20 Population growth has the potential to impact biodiversity and MNES because of housing requirements.21 Our ecological footprint is too large. Drought conditions reported by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) alert us to the need to carefully manage our water resources.22 Water-sensitive urban design is not a complete solution; we need to integrate water design into infrastructure planning and development. Waste reduction remains a challenge, and a circular economy is yet to emerge. Our transport emissions need to be capped and electric vehicles – for the purchase of which there are incentives – are only a partial answer. Across the city our use of public transport still rates at the lower end of the spectrum.23 06 Foreword.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report This 2019 State of the Environment Report provides commentary, analysis and recommendations. Environmental data and trends are presented. Environmental policy is discussed. We have improved our science communication with a dedicated website, GIS mapping, and ESRI Story Maps. Environmental economic accounting is explored in commentary about the value of volunteering, water, and butterfly populations in the ACT.24 Community resilience, action for sustainability, citizen science, and Ngunnawal Indigenous knowledge are included and celebrated. Finally, the ACT Government’s Climate Change Strategy 2019–2025 calls upon the community to commit to change. Here in this Office we endorse that call to action. It is important to recognise that it is the responsibility of each and every one of us – in government and the community – to make changes to our lifestyles to ensure that we leave our environment in no worse state than we found it, and that we do this wherever we have agency. Professor Kate Auty ACT Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment 24 For guidance about environmental economic accounting, see the UN Statistical Commission website, found at https://seea.un.org/content/seea-experimental-ecosystem-accounting-revision, accessed 30 October 2019. Acknowledgements Thanks go to Sean Grimes, the Director of State of the Environment Reporting, for the rigorous analysis which underpins this report, and to others in the Office who have contributed their skills. Thanks to the following ACT directorates and agencies which provided the data, policy and other information used in this report, and undertook reviews of draft content: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development; Transport; Canberra and City Services; Health, Education; Environment Protection Authority; Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development; Justice and Community Safety; ACT Emergency Services Agency; and the City Renewal Authority. Other content contributors include the Bureau of Meteorology, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Icon Water, National Capital Authority, ACT Waterwatch, Canberra Ornithologists Group, and Frogwatch. Thanks also go to expert contributors and reviewers including: Brad Moggridge (University of Canberra), Dr Sophie Lewis (University of NSW), Dr Fiona Dyer (University of Canberra), Associate Professor Michael Vardon (Australian National University), Professor Ian Falconer, Professor Phil Gibbons (Australian National University), Associate Professor Cris Brack (Australian National University), Professor Simon Haberle and colleagues (Australian National University), and Professor Sandy Toussaint (University of Western Australia and University of Notre Dame Australia). Photo credits go to Ryan Colley and Matthew Sherren. 07 Foreword.
ES ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Source: https://matthewsherrenphotography.com/ The ACT’s State of the Environment 2019 report responds to the statutory requirement to provide the ACT community and Government with commentary and analysis about the environment in the territory. The reporting period for this report is from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2019, with a data cut-off date of 30 June 2019. Formal recommendations are made, key actions are provided to assist with ongoing management, and data gaps and policy challenges are outlined. Drivers of environmental challenges and change continue to be climate change, our ecological footprint, population growth and development pressures. 08.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Ecological footprint In keeping with previous reports, the ACT’s ecological footprint has been calculated: servicing the total ACT footprint, as estimated in 2017–18, would require an area of land nine times the size of the territory. Our per capita footprint is 5.24 hectares, which is comparable to the footprint of the average Australian. Since 2009–10, there has been a decrease of 11% in the ACT’s total footprint and a decrease of 20% in our carbon footprint. Despite this, the ACT’s ecological footprint continues to test our resolve to live more sustainable lives. Indigenous environmental knowledge This report begins with a discussion of Indigenous people’s contribution to the understanding of cultural water and cultural-cool burns in the ACT. During the reporting period, the ACT Government engaged Traditional Custodians and developed consultation protocols with the United Ngunnawal Council of Elders. This consultation has informed ecological fire regimes and the Murray-Darling Basin Plan Water Resources Plans. Legislative changes about Indigenous fishing rights have been foreshadowed. Community sustainability leadership and citizen science Community sustainability leadership and citizen science initiatives have continued, been consolidated, and are celebrated in a stand-alone chapter in this report. The value of this work is significant in the monitoring and protection of biodiversity, and community commitment markedly improves sustainable practices in public parks, on private land, in schools, homes and businesses. Environmental economic accounting has been used to demonstrate the value of environmental volunteering in the ACT. Using this model, ‘replacement value’ would be in the order of $40–50 million per year. 1 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD), 2019, Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1413770/Canb erras-Living-Infrastructure-Plan.pdf , accessed 18 November 2019. This infrastructure plan was launched after the cut-off date for data for this report. Urban trees Canberra’s urban forest is a public illustration of everyday nature conservation. Living infrastructure – green and blue – is invaluable for protecting and enhancing biodiversity, and as a buffer against the impacts of climate change, including the urban heat island effect. The Canberra community considers tree canopy and water-sensitive urban design as critical to the city they value and enjoy. This has been shown in the commitment people made to the development of Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019–2025).1 A number of promising initiatives are detailed in this plan, including the need to factor climate change, senescence and dieback into planning. Academic research and the experience of other cities have been explored to assist in providing the evidence base for best practice. In terms of human needs, the associated co-benefits of developing a living infrastructure commitment are recognised to include improved health and wellbeing and the reduction of social isolation. The indicators developed in the ACT Government’s forthcoming Wellbeing Framework (2020) further link these benefits. The Living Infrastructure Plan adopts an innovative policy approach, aiming to explore the use of ‘natural capital accounting’ by using the United Nations System of Environmental-Economic Accounting to more clearly determine the value of the urban forest for decision making. 09 Executive Summary.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Climate change and Canberra The ACT Government joined the international community in declaring a climate emergency in May 2019. Government leadership in climate change and energy policy has received the recognition it deserves. The ACT will deliver on its commitment to provide 100% renewable energy to the Canberra community in 2020. In late 2019, the ACT Government renewed its commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions with the launch of its Climate Change Strategy 2019–25.2 The Government’s interest in removing gas from the territory’s energy mix is reinforced in this new strategy, reflecting leading emissions reduction practice. It is recognised that much of the ‘heavy lifting’ to meet renewable energy targets has been achieved through regulatory processes. The Canberra community is now being encouraged to harden its resolve to address climate change challenges at the personal and community level. Actsmart, the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate’s (EPSDD) program arm of environmental sustainability in the ACT Government, continues to deliver sustainability initiatives which engage the community and promote social equity. These programs cross sectors and portfolios and are cited extensively in this report. Waste and a circular economy The ACT Government was an early adopter of waste reduction targets and was the second jurisdiction in Australia to act on single-use plastic shopping bags. In 2018, a commitment to a wide-ranging community and Government discussion about waste and waste-to-energy was undertaken. The community is now being consulted about a further ban on single-use plastics. Our ability to further reduce waste has plateaued even as the ACT Government continues to evaluate policy, review current practices, advance ambitious waste reduction targets, improve 2 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov. au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate-Change-Strategy-2019-2025.pdf/_recache, accessed 18 November 2019. 3 Australian federal, state and local governments, 2018, National Waste Policy 2018, found at https://www.environment. gov.au/system/files/resources/d523f4e9-d958-466b-9fd1-3b7d6283f006/files/national-waste-policy-2018.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. It specifically invites circular economy action. annual reporting, build capacity for organics collections, undertake landfill methane capture, and consult the community about waste-to-energy proposals (2018–19). Actions have included aligning with NSW to introduce a highly successful Container Deposit Scheme and contributing to national waste reduction planning. Transitioning to a circular economy is now a national conversation.3 Transport Transport will become the ACT’s major source of greenhouse emissions after the territory transitions to 100% renewable energy in 2020. Canberrans have a perennial attachment to the use of private passenger vehicles which contributes to this problem. Analysis in this report shows that we have increased our uptake of diesel passenger vehicles with a resultant impact on air quality. Although the ACT (along with South Australia) has the highest rate of electric vehicle uptake in Australia, and government incentives support the expansion of private ownership of electric vehicles, electrification still constitutes a major challenge. The Government’s commitment to electrifying our transport modes and the Government fleet has the potential to reduce emissions in the transport sector. In terms of research and development, the adoption of other non-polluting fuels, such as hydrogen, is being explored. Our uptake of public and active transport is less than optimal. Digital technology apps and scheduling changes are being introduced in an effort to address this. Our uneven commitment to active travel across the city continues to be a concern, and cycling infrastructure and active travel programs are being instituted to remedy this. Cycling participation surveys show that Canberrans cycle more than other Australian city dwellers, but this is in comparison to a low base and recent cycling participation trends are not encouraging; Territory Plan Variations are being explored to build interest. 10 Executive Summary.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Water Land use impacts, modified river flows and climate change continue to impact on aquatic ecosystems in the ACT. The Snowy 2.0 project provides an opportunity to increase flows in the Murrumbidgee River, which would represent a significant boost for river health, biodiversity and recreational uses alike. Water resources are under pressure from decreased rainfall and catchments that provide water security and habitat are stressed. Murray-Darling Basin Plan Water Resources Plans – surface and groundwater – have been submitted and accepted. However, the ACT’s water use is not presently the subject of restrictions even though water levels are falling despite the recent enlargement of the Cotter Dam. Monitoring and evaluation of all of Canberra’s lakes remains an important consideration and academic partnerships, independent research, and reporting is critical to understanding and responding to challenges in a timely, efficient, rigorous and effective manner. A sustainable funding model to support monitoring and the management of water supply and catchment values must be put in place to counter a range of climate scenarios and their potential impacts on biodiversity and water security. Air quality Air quality is generally good in the ACT, except for particulate matter pollution from wood heaters, especially in the Tuggeranong Valley. A marked increase in numbers of diesel passenger vehicles and the associated pollution is a concerning trend. Rates of allergic rhinitis caused by pollen is also a significant health concern. More air quality monitoring stations are required to better understand localised issues. 4 City Renewal Authority, Strategic Plan 2018–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.act.gov.au/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0010/1284589/2025-Strategic-Plan.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 5 City Renewal Authority, 2018, Sustainability Strategy, ACT Government, Canberra found at https://www.act.gov.au/__data/ assets/pdf_file/0008/1280159/sustainability-strategy.pdf accessed on 18 November 2019. 6 National Capital Authority (NCA) and ACT Government, 2018, City and Gateway Draft Urban Design Framework, EPSDD, Canberra, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1296986/CITY-AND-GATEWAY-Urban-Design-Framewo rk.pdf, accessed on 21 November 2019. Land management and planning Land health, management and planning is fundamental to how we respond to the need to protect biodiversity and ecosystem services. The risks to biodiversity which stem from population growth and housing development need to be carefully managed. The establishment of the ACT Design Review Panel and the appointment of a Chief Engineer, coupled with the ACT Planning Strategy 2018, provide an opportunity to implement tighter controls over developments. The ACT Government’s promotion of an increase in infill development (up from 50% to 70%) has the potential to benefit the natural environment provided the commitment to the urban forest is met in the more compact developments that ensue. The transition to becoming a medium-density, mixed-use, compact city with development taking place along connected transport corridors will have its challenges. The City Renewal Authority’s Strategic Plan 2018–25,4 Sustainability Strategy,5 and City and Gateway Urban Design Framework (developed in partnership with the National Capital Authority)6 outline opportunities for sustainable compact city development in respect of place making, star ratings, water use, active travel, and tree canopy. 11 Executive Summary.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Biodiversity Biodiversity policy continues to reflect adaptive management. The Nature Conservation Act 2014 (ACT), Nature Conservation Strategy, Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program and Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program all link to provide transparent, accountable, evidence-based input into biodiversity policy and support the need for adaptive management methodologies. Biodiversity offsetting has been used to facilitate development which impacts Matters of National Environmental Significance. The Strategic Assessments for the development of Gungahlin and the Molonglo Valley, established pursuant to the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth), have been independently audited by the Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE). Independent audits will continue every five years. Other strategic assessments are foreshadowed. It will continue to be important to actively engage the community and environmental non-government organisations in the consideration of any proposed ACT biodiversity offsets even as the criteria for establishment adopts the Commonwealth Offsets Guide. Challenging biodiversity issues remain. These include the adoption of a sustainable funding model; implementing modern, efficient and effective data management infrastructure; anticipating, understanding, and managing climate change impacts on ecosystems and species; the monitoring, evaluation and management of pressures associated with urban development and Canberrans’ ecological footprint; the ongoing legacy of historic clearing and land management practices; and the management and eradication of invasive plants and animals. Fire As this report was finalised, we witnessed the first ever declaration of a ‘catastrophic’ fire danger warning for the city of Sydney (November 2019). The ACT’s geography and development patterns coupled with climate change projections and realities mean our natural landscapes, biodiversity, habitat and water catchments face an increasing fire risk. Many strategic and operational interventions have occurred since the 2003 bushfires. Policy is evidence-based, evaluated, and reviewed within stipulated timeframes, and policy renewal has been routinely instituted. Infrastructure and service delivery expenditure on operational matters will potentially be stretched, given cross-jurisdictional responsibilities and collaborations. Policy responses State of the environment reports routinely consider government policy responses to the environmental challenges associated with drivers of change including climate change and human settlements. There has been considerable policy renewal in this reporting period. In the ACT, the government assumes local and sub-national responsibilities. Being landlocked, the ACT needs to work with NSW on environmental matters. Cross-jurisdictional operations such as the Container Deposit Scheme illustrate the potential, but illegal waste transfers and biodiversity risk factors, such as feral horses in national parks, continue to test resolve and the capacity to respond. Innovation and leadership are critical in times of change. The ACT Government accepts the fact that we are living through a climate emergency. The Government is a recognised leader in driving research and development in energy policy. Other jurisdictions have adopted the ACT’s reverse auction mechanism for advancing renewable energy projects. Business is an advocate of ACT policy in this regard. Early adopters are beneficiaries of leadership. 12 Executive Summary.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Integration of environmental policy across portfolios is complex. For instance, action on waste and plastic pollution involves a number of ministers and their directorates. Climate and energy policy offers insights into how policy and operations, community and business matters are intrinsically linked; how cross-portfolio responsibilities such as transport and building regulations both underpin and impact outcomes. Blending policy and operational matters, the Actsmart program, offers a good example of integration, cross-portfolio collaboration and alignment, and the benefits of routine and targeted policy evaluation. The importance of policy continuity is also apparent in this well-integrated program. The tension between the need for clear and stable climate and energy policy, and support for environmental adaptive management in relation to sustainability and biodiversity, reflects the differentiated nature of policy across the environment portfolio. On the one hand, policy needs to be highly structured and stable but, on the other, it must be flexible and responsive. ‘One size’ does not fit all. Implementation challenges are generally well understood in the ACT. However, it has been the experience of the OCSE when conducting investigations into strategic assessments and water policy that delays do occur, and implementation plans have been deferred. In the reporting period the ACT Government has responded positively to OCSE corrective action requests and recommendations about environmental management issues.7 7 See OCSE, 2018, Independent Audit of the Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https:// www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-molonglo-valley-strategic-assessment; OCSE, 2018, Independent Audit of the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov. au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-gungahlin-strategic-assessment Rigorous reporting, as well as routine review and evaluation, is also necessary for accountability and transparency. The ACT’s policy instruments across the environmental spectrum commonly establish review requirements including timeframes, reporting and consultation obligations. The ACT Government has worked hard to engage the community in environmental policy design and evaluation and has put in place a number of processes to formalise these consultative arrangements, including adopting deliberative democracy, using and continuing to explore digital technologies, and inviting the contributions and critical thinking of young professionals. The report which follows discusses these and other matters and provides recommendations, indicator assessments, key actions, and a range of illustrative case studies. 13 Executive Summary.
RE ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report RECOMMENDATIONS The following recommendations are to assist the ACT Government to make strategic and practical decisions, and undertake specific actions to improve environmental outcomes. The recommendations aim to focus ACT Government effort where it is likely to have the greatest impact including opportunities to integrate multiple environmental outcomes into government policies and programs. Under the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993, the ACT Government is required to present a statement that sets out its responses to these recommendations within six months of tabling this State of the Environment 2019 report in the Legislative Assembly.1 Government responses are monitored and reported in OCSE annual reports. 1 Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993, section 19(3). 14 © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The ACT Government undertake the following: OVERARCHING RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendation 1: establish a sustainable funding model for the conservation of biodiversity, environmental protection, water management, the reduction of fire risks, and citizen science initiatives to assist in the planning, prioritisation and acquittal of programs and works. Recommendation 2: establish data management architecture, especially for environmental issues, to address cross-portfolio communication needs. Recommendation 3: establish a mechanism to ensure the alignment of ACT ministerial arrangements and the promotion of information sharing on the basis that environmental issues are the concern of ‘one government’ and across portfolios. Recommendation 4: identify opportunities to improve collaboration with the NSW Government on cross-jurisdictional natural resource management. This should include participation in data collection programs and active management of natural resource management pressures. Recommendation 5: ensure community participation in the design of all new Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 strategic assessments and ensure that information flow about offsets, implementation plans, and programs is publicly accessible and understandable, regular, targeted, and subject to community and other consultation. Recommendation 6: lead collaborative networks where regional policy and operational matters require cross-jurisdictional cooperation. INDIGENOUS MATTERS Recommendation 7: continue consultation with Ngunnawal people to: • explore the potential of developing a unified Framework for Cultural Indicators in respect of cultural water and cultural burning • explore the management potential of an Indigenous Seasonal Calendar • consider the establishment of an Indigenous River Rangers program, and • establish a specific category of Indigenous heritage grants. SUSTAINABILITY LEADERSHIP AND CITIZEN SCIENCE Recommendation 8: continue to explore the use of ‘deliberative democracy’ for environmental initiatives in accordance with the aspirations of the ACT Whole of Government Communications and Engagement Plan 2019 and in collaboration with the Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 Community Liaison Team. Recommendation 9: specifically provide for the recognition of citizen science and community environmental action with a targeted awards program. URBAN TREES Recommendation 10: advance Action 1 of the Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019) by convening an environmental-economic accounts steering committee with representatives from government, academics and the community. Recommendation 11: continue to collaborate with other jurisdictions and research institutes to generate the evidence base for appropriate urban forest understorey and other plantings, having specific regard to climate change implications. 15 Recommendations.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CLIMATE CHANGE Recommendation 12: engage the community in consultation about and the design of the Social Cost of Carbon mechanism under consideration in the Climate Change Strategy 2019–25. Recommendation 13: investigate opportunities to increase carbon uptake and storage in natural ecosystems and urban environments. Recommendation 14: encourage and provide incentives for the development and uptake of distributed energy storage and microgrid technology in domestic, commercial, and government buildings and infrastructure. HUMAN SETTLEMENTS Waste Recommendation 15: advance its contribution to adopting a circular economy in accordance with the National Waste Strategy. Transport Recommendation 16: explore incentives to increase the uptake of public transport, car and ride sharing options, and active travel, including cycling amongst women and girls. Recommendation 17: consider implementing innovative community engagement programs which encourage active travel, including the establishment of car-free streets and car-free dates as a part of the ACT festival calendar. Recommendation 18: hasten the electrification of the ACT bus fleet. Recommendation 19: promote the use of digital technology applications to streamline the uptake of public transport options. AIR Recommendation 20: build on the incentives to encourage the replacement of wood heaters, specifically targeting the Tuggeranong Valley. Recommendation 21: increase the number of National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure compliance monitoring stations. Recommendation 22: urgently undertake an assessment of air pollutant emissions from diffuse sources to update the National Pollutant Inventory data (1999). Recommendation 23: in collaboration with health professionals, improve knowledge of the impacts of air pollution on human health and the associated costs to the health system and economy. LAND Recommendation 24: improve knowledge on land use change in the ACT. This could be achieved through the development of annual land accounts using the United Nations System of Environmental-Economic Accounting framework. BIODIVERSITY Recommendation 25: increase the protection of mature and hollow-bearing trees to maintain critical habitat and provide incentives for rural landholders to protect paddock trees. Recommendation 26: expand its communication strategy in respect of biodiversity and environmental issues and encourage ACT Government employees to make biodiversity reports available to the community in innovative ways. 16 Recommendations.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report WATER Recommendation 27: institute a State of the Canberra Lakes reporting initiative, commencing in 2020. Recommendation 28: produce an annual recreational water quality report that includes monitoring results, investigations into the main sources of pollutants, recommended actions to improve water quality, and assessments of management effectiveness. Recommendation 29: establish a government reporting framework for the assessment of aquatic ecosystem health and water quality. This should incorporate work undertaken for the Catchment Health Indicator Program and produce public reports at appropriate intervals to provide meaningful assessments. Recommendation 30: ensure implementation plans are produced for the Molonglo River Reserve, Lower Cotter Catchment and Googong Foreshore management plans. Recommendation 31: provide incentives to increase wastewater recycling and the use of non-potable water by the community. Recommendation 32: identify opportunities to develop integrated water cycle management (as well as water-sensitive urban design) across new and existing urban areas, capturing and using stormwater and creating biodiversity habitat. Recommendation 33: review codes which relate to flooding and finalise the 2016 flood strategy and associated flood mapping. FIRE Recommendation 34: ensure tolerable fire intervals are considered in decision frameworks for prescribed burns. Recommendation 35: regularly evaluate and report publicly on the commitment to ecological and cultural burning and the outcomes of these activities. 17 Recommendations.
01 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 01 CONTEXT Marian Mahony watercolour of proposed Canberra city. Source: Kindly provided by the National Capital Authority. Section contents The climate emergency – the globe, the climate and ecosystem service depletion 19 Canberra and the ACT – the environment and its challenges 21 The contents of this report 27 18.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report ‘… climate change has arrived and is accelerating faster than most scientists expected … it is more severe than anticipated, threatening natural ecosystems and the fate of humanity. Especially worrisome are potential irreversible tipping points.’ 1 THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY – THE GLOBE, THE CLIMATE AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICE DEPLETION 1 Ripple, W. J. et al., 2019, ‘World Scientists’ Warning of a Climate Emergency’, BioScience, biz088, found at https://academic.oup.com/bioscience/advance-article/doi/10.1093/biosci/biz088/5610806, accessed 7 November 2019. 2 Brondizio E.S. et al., eds, 2019, Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services: Summary for Policymakers, IPBES Secretariat, Bonn, found at https://www.ipbes.net/global-assessment-report-biodiversity-ecosystem-services, accessed 18 November 2019. 3 United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., eds, 2018, Special Report:Global Warming of 1.5 °C, IPCC, Geneva, found at https://report.ipcc.ch/sr15/pdf/sr15_spm_final.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 4 IPCC, 2019, Climate Change and Land: An IPCC Special Report on Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food Security and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes and Terrestrial Ecosystems, found at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ srccl/, accessed 18 November 2019. 5 UN Science Advisory Group to the UN Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit, 2019, United in Science: High-level Synthesis Report of Latest Climate Science Information, World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and Science Advisory Group of the UN, found at https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/climsci.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 6 IPCC, 2019, Special Report on the Ocean and the Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, found at https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/ uploads/sites/3/2019/09/SROCC_SPM_HeadlineStatements.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 7 Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, 2019, Outlook Report 2019, found at http://www.gbrmpa.gov.au/our-work/ outlook-report-2019, accessed 18 November 2019. 8 ACT Emergency Services Agency (ESA), 25 March 2019, ‘Bushfire Season Extended – Longest Season Since 2003’, https://esa.act.gov.au/2019/03/25/bushfire-season-extended-longest-season-since-2003, accessed 18 November 2019. 9 Australian Bureau of Meteorology (BOM), 1 November 2019, ‘Australian Capital Territory in October 2019: Warm Days and Drier Than Average’, found at http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/month/act/summary.shtml , accessed 18 November 2019. The shadow of climate and biodiversity emergencies hangs over this report. Multiple recently published scientific reports warn us about our trajectory. In 2019 the Intergovernmental Panel on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, in its Global Assessment Report, issued a dire warning about the impending threats to biodiversity as a function of the manner in which humanity exploits and undermines environmental services and resources.2 Again in 2019, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has reported that many environmental services will struggle to provision, regulate and support humanity, if we fail to meet the Paris COP target, and that even if we were able to meet the target of 1.5 °C, much of the environment will still be badly impacted.3 In its latest report on climate change and land, the IPCC echoes these conclusions.4 Again in 2019, the IPCC synthesis report United in Science brings the data and the climate implications into sharp relief,5 and the IPCC Special Report on Oceans and the Cryosphere telegraphs climate emergency concerns, while indelibly linking oceans, marine life, terrestrial and freshwater species.6 In our region, the 2019 outlook report for the Great Barrier Reef concludes that ‘the greatest threat to the Reef is climate change’ and that the overall outlook for the reef’s ecosystem is ‘very poor’.7 Multiple bushfires have occurred in Queensland and NSW from September to November 2019. These fires have been described by the Queensland Fire Service as the worst bushfire threat in recorded history. Lives have been lost and houses burnt, native species incinerated, soils roasted, communities evacuated, schools closed, and stock were shifted in circumstances of urgency. The ACT bushfire season was extended in 2018–19, at which time it was the longest season since 2003.
8 The Australian BOM reports that eastern Australia is experiencing a drought worse than the Federation or the Millennium droughts and that rainfall figures in the northern Murray-Darling Basin are the worst on record. Rainfall in the ACT reflects these observations.9 Some responses to the crisis we face illustrate the serious and highly unusual steps we are taking to respond. Following a 2019 technical report about water sharing in the Murray-Darling Basin, ascribing the blame for fish deaths, algal blooms and reduced water run-off to catchment management and climate change, the NSW Government committed 19 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report an unprecedented $10 million to fish relocations to avoid a ‘fish armageddon’ and an ‘ecological disaster’.10 And, as we know, everything is linked and action or inaction have unintended consequences. The crash in Bogong Moth numbers in the last 2 years from 4.4 million to insignificant numbers – likely associated with drought and human induced climate change11 – is already affecting the critically endangered Mountain Pygmy-possum which, 10 Moritz, C. et al., 2019, Investigation of the Causes of Mass Fish Kills in the Menindee Region NSW over the Summer of 2018–19, Australian Academy of Science, Canberra, found at https://www.science.org.au/files/userfiles/support/reports-and-plans/2019/ academy-science-report-mass-fish-kills-digital.pdf accessed 18 November 2019; Vertessy, R. et al., 2019, Independent Assessment of the 2018–19 Fish Deaths in the Lower Darling, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/Fin al-Report-Independent-Panel-fish-deaths-lower%20Darling_4.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019; see also Sheldon, F., 2019, Technical Review of the Water Sharing Plan for the Barwon-Darling Unregulated and Alluvial Water Sources, NSW Natural Resources Commission, found at https://apo.org.au/node/254626, accessed 18 November 2019. 11 Landcare Australia, 2019, ‘Help Monitor Plummeting Bogong Moth Numbers and Protect Endangered Mountain Pygmy-Possum’, found at https://landcareaustralia.org.au/news/help-monitor-plummeting-bogong-moth-numbers-and-protect-endanger ed-mountain-pygmy-possum, accessed 18 November 2019. when it emerges from its 5–7 month hibernation, depends on the moth for food. The ACT’s ecological footprint, which we have calculated for this report, informs us that we require nine times the area of the ACT to maintain our current lifestyles. Our use of resources is depleting the ecosystem services that we rely upon. Our resource use is unsustainable and has implications for the nature world and human settlements (see the infographic below). Ecosystem services Supporting services Recreational Spiritual / aesthetic Food Climate regulation Fresh water Flood regulation and water purification Water security and sanitation Food security Livelihoods and enterprise Sufficient nutritious food Health Safety from hazards Social cohesion Economic development opportunities Human well-being Infographic created by OCSE, sourced from the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). It is in this context that this ACT State of the Environment Report is provided to the ACT community to inform, empower and hopefully inspire environmental action. 20 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CANBERRA AND THE ACT – THE ENVIRONMENT AND ITS CHALLENGES 12 Pegrum, R., 2008, The Bush Capital: How Australia Chose Canberra as its Federal Capital, Watermark Books, Sydney. 13 See the OCSE’s Independent Audits of the Gungahlin and Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessments, for an extended discussion, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/1168405/FINAL-report-7-Dec-with-changes-from-EPS DD-Independent-Audit-of-the-Gungahlin-Strategic-Assessment-November-2017-A14477882.pdf and https://www.envcomm.act. gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-molonglo-valley-strategic-assessment, both accessed 18 November 2019. 14 ACT Government, 2018, Planning Strategy, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0007/1285972/2018-ACT-Planning-Strategy.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 15 Steffen, W. and L. Hughes, 2014, Be Prepared: Climate Change and the ACT Bushfire Threat, report for the Climate Council of Australia Ltd, found at http://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/a56c563caa5bb336050ed88c60dba7e4.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. The Australian Capital Territory sits entirely within the Murray-Darling Basin and is the site of a vast national park, Namadgi, and a wilderness zone at Tidbinbilla. Remarkably, 60% of the ACT’s land mass is designated as some form of nature conservation. Canberra Nature Park covers 11,000 hectares and includes 37 nature reserves. Snow in Namadgi National Park. Source: OCSE. While it is the national capital and a ‘planned city’, Canberra is routinely described as the ‘bush capital’.12 Unlike any other Australian capital city, almost 50% of Canberrans live within 500 metres of native bushland. The region’s population has been growing steadily and the expansion of the city has relied heavily upon the provision of biodiversity offsets, some of which, when associated with Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 strategic assessments, have been the subject of independent audits.13 It is encouraging that the ACT Government now aspires to have 70% of new development constructed as infill within the present city footprint.14 Plans for Canberra. Source: National Capital Authority. The proximity of the city to the natural environment creates vulnerabilities and risks which need to be carefully managed. In 2003 4 people died, 435 people were injured, and 5,000 people were evacuated as a result of bushfires which devastated suburbs of the city. These fires burned nearly 70% of the ACT, 90% of Namadgi National Park was damaged, insurance costs ran to $660 million, and the value of lost forestry was $1,494 billion. In the agricultural sector, 4,000 kilometres of fencing and 300 agricultural buildings were destroyed, and 4,000 cattle and 13,000 sheep were killed or had to be euthanised.15 The impact on native species was incalculable. Although small in size, management and governance arrangements in the ACT are complicated. The ACT Government assumes both local and state government responsibilities. It also works across the border with NSW and with regional local governments, and is impacted by and has contributions to the decisions taken and policy and regulatory interventions in those jurisdictions. This level of complexity plays out in cross-jurisdictional policy challenges, all of which compound the difficulties associated with the intricate, multifaceted, non-linear nature of environmental policy generally. 21 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CROSS-JURISDICTIONAL COMPLEXITY – FROM WASTE TO BIODIVERSITY Waste Jurisdictional complexity is evident in the waste sector. The ACT deals with operational and local government matters including the street collection of rubbish; sub-national responsibilities such as cross-border waste, including the legislated establishment of the Container Deposit Scheme in partnership with NSW, and the potential for and difficulties in policing illegal waste transfers across borders; and high-level and national responsibilities, including contributing to the emerging national commitment to develop a circular economy. Biodiversity, brumbies and the cross-border complexities of national parks The ACT’s ‘landlocked’ status has implications for both biodiversity policy and practice. The Australian Alps and the Kosciuszko National Park lie to the south of the ACT, a connection which leaves the Namadgi National Park, the unique Ginini Ramsar Wetland, and other – now protected – bogs and fens, vulnerable to pest species such as brumbies crossing into the ACT. Differences in state and territory policies about such matters results in the natural environment of the ACT being exposed to risks over which it has little control, notwithstanding the launch of the ACT’s Biosecurity Strategy in 2016. Brumbies in the wild. Source: Dianne Thompson of SaveKosci and the National Parks Association. 22 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report It is important to note that the things that define the ‘bush capital’ and its people are an interest in and commitment to the natural environment, the promotion of community engagement and co-design of policy and activities, and an abiding interest in environmental volunteering across a very wide spectrum. Other core values and interests include • a critical and active interest in planning and development as well as the design of a compact future-focused national capital • bringing youth along on the environmental journey with the sustainability in schools programs where they learn leadership and other skills, and • a genuine commitment to celebrating and protecting both our Indigenous and European heritage. Community interest and government commitment align neatly in respect of the importance ascribed to heritage in the ACT. An understanding of our post-settlement cultural roots is just one limb of the Canberra community’s immersion in ‘place’. Callam Offices, Phillip. Source: https://matthewsherrenphotography.com/ 23 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report HERITAGE: 2015–201916 16 The continued interest in reporting on local heritage in the ACT State of the Environment Report echoes a broader interest in Australian State of the Environment reports. 17 ACT Government, 2018, media release found at https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/open_government/inform/act_government_ media_releases/gentleman/2018/heritage-projects-receive-$363,000-boost-in-grants accessed 28 November 2019. The Cameron Offices, Belconnen. Source: Shannon Battisson, The Mill Architecture and Design. National Museum of Australia. Source: OCSE. The Heritage Act 2004, Heritage Assessment Policy 2015, Heritage Council, ACT Heritage, and the Heritage Advisory Service guide the ACT’s heritage policy. The Heritage Register captures 464 historic places and 25 precincts, 197 registered historic places (including precincts), and 13 registered historical objects. In 2018–19, the ACT Government supported community heritage projects through grants totalling $363,784.17 In 2019, projects which received grants included the preservation of Indigenous cultural learning centres, an exhibition on the evolution of cricket, and restoration of historic street signage. Since 2015 the Heritage Council has made 24 registration decisions including for the Yarralumla Woolshed, Greenhills stone ruin at Stromlo, Tidbinbilla pise homesteads, the Rosebud Apiary slab buildings, the Starlight Drive-In Theatre Sign, and the Glenburn Precinct at Kowen. Rosebud Heritage Cottage. Source: http://www.rosebudcottages.com/ 24 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Transport heritage has been elevated with timber bus shelters in inner Canberra, and the Kingston and Reid railway system remnants receiving recognition. Modern architecture and space exploration technology have been recognised with the registration of the Northbourne Housing Precinct Representative Sample, St Joseph’s Catholic Church in O’Connor, and the Orroral Valley and Honeysuckle Creek tracking stations. Indigenous heritage values have been protected at the Ginninderry development. Where a nomination has been made under the Nature Conservation Act 1980 (ACT), amendments in 2014 to the Heritage Act restrict the power to register natural heritage. Provisional registration of 12 nominated natural places has been declined in this reporting cycle. However, the Red Hill Historic Plantings (a direct living infrastructure link to the Burley Griffin and Mahony Canberra plan), and the Barton Highway Road Cut in Nicholls (showing the unconformity in Black Mountain and Camp Hill sandstone) received recognition. Reflecting observations about the arrival of the digital age in environmental volunteering, heritage communication strategies increasingly use modern digital techniques. These include hologram videos of Indigenous people’s perspectives at Molonglo, a range of activities across the ACT’s Heritage Festival, and the Canberra Tracks app (Google Play or Apple Store download). Unfortunately, and notwithstanding the clear commitment to the preservation of heritage in the ACT, the audit of heritage sites recommended in the State of the Environment 2015 report has not been undertaken due to funding constraints and workload obligations. A number of nominations predating the Heritage Act await assessment. During the 2018 Canberra and Region Heritage Festival, the public were able to tour the heritage-listed Giralang Primary School with architect Enrico Taglietti. Source: Linda Roberts. 25 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Heritage in the ACT 2015–2019 Heritage registration decisions increased DAs = Development applications ACTPLA = ACT Planning and Land Authority Infographic created by OCSE, information sourced from https://www.environment.act.gov.au/heritage/heritage_register Applications fell Rejections increased From 1,611 to 1,789 From 49 to 226 Heritage advice on DA referrals increased Advice on ACTPLA DAs rose significantly Total DAs fell Total registrations increased DAs impacting heritage increased Minor works application rose significantly From 28 to 51 From 27 to 22 From 30 to 94 From 228 to 663 From 139 to 143 From 1,128 to 1,080 26 01 Context.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report THE CONTENTS OF THIS REPORT This is the first State of the Environment Report in Australia to start with a chapter on Indigenous people’s interests. OCSE has endeavoured to reflect the depth of Aboriginal people’s knowledge and commitment to caring for country. Chapter 2 Ngunnawal Country is just a beginning. In the chapter which follows the discussion about Ngunnawal concerns, we report on the extraordinary community commitment to the environment and citizen science in the ACT; we then consider the benefits and challenges which attend the design, development, and protection of Canberra’s urban forest. Condition and trends in environmental management follow these introductory chapters. Data has been collected and analysed for trends on climate change, human settlements (energy, water, waste and transport), air, land, biodiversity, water and fire. A further ecological footprint has been calculated for Canberrans, and whilst our footprint now aligns with that of other Australian states, we know that we still require nine times the land mass of the ACT to service our demands on ecosystem services. The footprint is reported in the chapter on human settlements. A discussion of the policy responses the ACT Government is adopting on the environment concludes this report. Much in the policy arena is good or best practice even though it is always possible to improve organisational responses. It is critical to acknowledge that a business-as-usual approach will not be enough to address the growing concern about the climate emergency we face and nor will it arrest the decline in biodiversity and the provision of ecosystem services. There are many potential pathways. We need to act with wisdom when deciding how the ACT wishes to progress. Multiple pathways (same scale, different groups) Past Dominant pathway (past) Possible pathway not taken (past) Possible dominant pathways (future) Present Future Abrupt events Decision points Deliberating trade-offs Negotiating resilience Business as usual Transformation Graphic derived from the IPCC’s Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C (Figure 5.5). 27 01 Context.
02 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 02 NGUNNAWAL COUNTRY Source: https://matthewsherrenphotography.com/ Section contents Recommendations 29 Ngunnawal Country of the ACT 29 Recognition 30 Aboriginal heritage protection: Heritage Act 2004 and the Human Rights Act 2004 30 Registrations of Indigenous heritage 2015–2019 31 Indigenous heritage protection: sanctions and significance 31 There is more to do – seeking a holistic approach 31 Ngunnawal Cultural Heritage 32 Caring for Country 33 Indigenous voices – water, land and language 33 Water: cultural water and Indigenous management 35 Contemporary water management and Indigenous cultural flows 36 ACT plans and commitments to cultural water 37 Change is slow and culturally complex 38 Indigenous research foundations and outcomes 39 The future: a Framework for Cultural Indicators and a River Rangers program 40 Land: Cultural – cool – burning on Country 41 Cultural burns in the south 42 Aboriginal Fire Management Framework 43 Cultural Indicators: a proposal for Ngunnawal Country 46 28.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendation 7: continue consultation with Ngunnawal people to: • explore the potential of developing a unified Framework for Cultural Indicators in respect of cultural water and cultural burning • explore the management potential of an Indigenous Seasonal Calendar • consider the establishment of an Indigenous River Rangers program, and • establish a specific category of Indigenous heritage grants. 1 This chapter was first discussed with Ngunnawal people associated with the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD) and then compiled in collaboration with Bradley Moggridge, Kamilaroi water scientist and University of Canberra PhD candidate, who holds a Master’s of Science (hydrology and groundwater management) and a Bachelor of Science degree. He is a Fellow of the Peter Cullen Trust, and a contributor to the International WaterCentre (IWC) Water Leadership Program and Indigenous Leadership program at the Australian Indigenous Leadership Centre (AILC). Bradley has been recognised widely for his scientific contributions: 2017 ACU Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Alumni Award, 2019 NAIDOC Scholar of the Year Award, 2019, Inaugural Australian Academy of Science ATSI Travel award, part-time Indigenous Liaison Officer with the Threatened Species Recovery Hub (NESP), and 2019 ACT Tall Poppy of the Year for Science. Bradley was also the Head of the NSW Department of Primary Industry Water Aboriginal Water Initiative. 2 R. Paltridge and A. Skroblin, 2018, ‘Threatened Species Monitoring on Aboriginal Land: Finding the Common Ground between Kuka, Jukurrpa, Ranger Work and Science’ in S. Legge, D. Lindenmayer, N.M. Robinson, B.C. Scheele, D.M. Southwell, B. Wintle (eds), Monitoring Threatened Species and Ecological Communities, CSIRO, Canberra; and on community engagement more generally see J. Koleck, 2018, ‘Community Involvement in Monitoring Threatened Species: a WWF Perspective’ in S. Legge, D. Lindenmayer, N.M. Robinson, B.C. Scheele, D.M. Southwell, B. Wintle (eds), Monitoring Threatened Species and Ecological Communities, CSIRO, Canberra. NGUNNAWAL COUNTRY OF THE ACT This is the first time the ACT State of the Environment Report has begun with the consideration of Ngunnawal people’s issues and interests.1 This work is intended to promote respect for Indigenous cultural water and cultural cool burning strategies and techniques. It also intended as a guide to possible further work with the Ngunnawal people. It is not intended to replace the detailed cultural and community consultation which should precede every initiative that impacts Ngunnawal people in this jurisdiction. It is now increasingly recognised that Indigenous knowledge is vital to our understanding of how our environment works and the development of sustainable best practice in Australia.2 29 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Recognition The ACT Government has taken a number of steps to reflect and respect Aboriginal heritage. These include establishing the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Elected Body Act 2008, the Reconciliation Action Plan Endorsement, the Whole of Government ACT Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Agreement 2015–2018, which was updated to 2019–2028 and supported by a Development Action Plan, the establishment of a Traditional Caring for Country Committee, and Traditional Custodian Engagement. At the organisational level, the ACT Government has appointed a Healthy Country Manager in the Environment Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD) and established a Ngunnawal Bush Healing Farm (2016). Canberrans have been afforded a public holiday for Reconciliation Day, and Reconciliation Action Plans are either operational or in development across the ACT public service. The ACT Government recognises the Ngunnawal people as the Traditional Custodians of Country. The ACT Government has embarked upon consultation with the Ngunnawal and other Aboriginal people in respect of cultural burning, producing the Aboriginal Fire Management Framework (2015).3 Further, in 2019 in relation to water issues, the ACT Government produced the Murray-Darling Basin Plan (MDB Plan) Water Resource Plan (WRP) with appropriate commitments to Indigenous water consultations, acknowledging that until WRP consultations commenced in 2015 there had been ‘little engagement [with Aboriginal people] in water resource planning’.4 3 B. Williamson, ACT Parks and Conservation Service, 2015, ACT Aboriginal Cultural Guidelines for Fuel and Fire Management Operations in the ACT, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/media/6500/ aboriginal-cultural-guidelines-for-fuel-and-fire-management-operations-in-the-act.pdf ; ACT Parks and Conservation Service, 2015, ACT Aboriginal Fire Management Plan 2015–2016, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/media/6501/act-aboriginal-fire-management-plan-2015-16.pdf 4 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra:108, 116, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-a pril-2019.pdf ; EPSDD, 2019, Indigenous Objectives, Desired Outcomes, Values and Uses Report, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/ACT-WRP-Appendix-K-Indigenous-objectives-outcomes-valu es-uses-report-2019.pdf 5 Human Rights Act 2004 (ACT), s.27 (amendment in 2016): (2) Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples hold distinct cultural rights and must not be denied the right – (a) to maintain, control, protect and develop their – (i) cultural heritage and distinctive spiritual practices, observances, beliefs and teaching and (ii) languages and knowledge and (iii) kinship ties and (b) to have their material and economic relationships with the land and waters and other resources with which they have a connection under traditional laws and customs recognised and valued. The ACT Human Rights Commission established a Cultural Safety Charter in 2019. Ngattai yeddung (Ngunnawal) Listen good, which can be found at https://hrc.act.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/10484R-HRC-Cultural-Safety-Charter-Plan-July-2019_web.pdf. This initiative falls outside the reporting period and is not the subject of commentary here. Aboriginal heritage protection: Heritage Act 2004 and the Human Rights Act 2004 Aboriginal heritage sites in north Canberra, Top: Gubur Dhaura ochre quarry, Bottom: Gurbur Duhaura ochre quarry. Source: ABC News. Aboriginal cultural heritage is formally recognised and protected in the ACT. The ACT Human Rights Act 2004 makes it clear that Aboriginal people’s ‘material and economic relationships with the land and waters and other resources’ should be recognised (amendment 2016).5 30 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report There are 75 Aboriginal places and objects on the Heritage Act 2004 Heritage Register, and many include information about more than one site or object. Citations on the register include information on 2930 sites. The Heritage Act 2004 provides for Indigenous membership on the Heritage Council. The Council consults with representative Aboriginal organisations on questions of registration, possible restrictions, and Heritage Guidelines. Further to that, all Aboriginal places and objects are reported on a central database and protected under the Heritage Act 2004, even if they are not ‘registered’. Offences against Aboriginal heritage which involve reckless or negligent damage or disturbance are proscribed (section 75). Disturbance for the purposes of development will result in the storage and repatriation of cultural material, as occurred when the Cotter Dam was expanded, and a Statement of Heritage Effects is used to control the effects of altering a site. The Heritage Council has assumed the responsibility to negotiate with developers about the protection of Indigenous heritage, most recently working with Ngunnawal people and the proponents of the Ginninderra subdivision in respect of a sewer trunk where the original alignment cut through an important corrobboree ground. Registrations of Indigenous heritage 2015–2019 In this reporting period, three heritage registration decisions were made and five heritage nominations were accepted for consideration. Many other sites, stone tool scatters and scar trees have been reported and will be protected because they are Aboriginal sites. The three new registrations were: • Red Hill Campsite – a place where Aboriginal people camped throughout the 1920s to 1940s • Corroboree Ground and Cultural Area, Queanbeyan River at the junction with the Molonglo River, and • Umbagong Park Grinding Grooves in Latham. The Aboriginal voice in respect of that site reflects its significance. 6 EPSDD 2018, ACT Water Planning Meeting Minutes, May 2018, Aboriginal Water Assessment Consultations, scribe Mary Mudford, provided by EPSDD. 7 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra: 118, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-april-2019.pdf 8 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra: 108, 116, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-april-2019.pdf ‘… this place is very important because of its grinding grooves, medicine and fibres … there were strong cultural practices in this region.’6 Indigenous heritage protection: sanctions and significance The ACT Government is bringing the following legislation to the Legislative Assembly to resolve issues which have arisen in this reporting period: 1. Strict liability for offences involving the damage or destruction of heritage. In respect of heritage protection, the felling and destruction of two scar trees at Wanniassa has resulted in the government drafting legislation which will provide for a strict liability offence for any and all heritage destruction. This will obviate the need to prove intent to damage heritage sites. It is proposed an infringement notice process will be established. 2. Recognition of cultural significance of Indigenous fishery management in fishery reform. The ACT Government is introducing a Bill which will provide for Aboriginal people’s cultural right to take fish (Nature Conservation Act 2014). There is more to do – seeking a holistic approach The ACT Government recognises there is always room for improvement and has reported that while Aboriginal heritage processes do refer to Indigenous water and land issues, this is not done as a ‘holistic land and water approach’.7 Should the ACT Government consider advancing discussions about a unified Framework for Cultural Indicators, as is suggested here, much more consultation will be required, as has already been envisaged in the ACT Water Resource Plan (prepared to comply with the Commonwealth’s Water Act 2007 and the associated Murray-Darling Basin Plan).8 31 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Ngunnawal Country – the view looking south from Sammy’s Hill, north Canberra. Source: Brad Moggridge. NGUNNAWAL CULTURAL HERITAGE 9 Josephine Flood recorded sites in the 1970s and 1980s and observed at that time ‘traces of over 800 Aboriginal open campsites have been found in the ACT. Most are on the banks of large rivers … particularly near good fishing spots. An intensive survey of a one-kilometre wide strip on either side of the Murrumbidgee River from the northern to the southern border of the ACT was made during the drought years of the 1980s. This revealed 125 Aboriginal sites ‘… [including] five stone quarries and five trees scarred from the removal of sheets of bark’. 1996 Flood observed that over 3000 Indigenous cultural sites were then recorded. Flood, J., 1996, Moth Hunters of the Australian Capital Territory. Aboriginal Traditional Life in the Canberra Region, Gecko Books, South Australia. 10 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Molonglo River Reserve Management Plan, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/View/di/2019-192/current/PDF/2019-192.PDF Ngunnawal cultural heritage is evident across the whole ACT landscape.9 Cultural iconography can be found carved and displayed on rock, from axe-grinding grooves on river rocks to stone tool scatters, and highly significant rock art in the Namadgi National Park. Ochre quarries, which would have had great ceremonial and trading value, have been protected within Canberra’s city boundaries at Red Hill and Gungahlin. Scar trees across the city, from Wanniassa to Bonner, tell of water courses as cultural resources. Major campsites have been recorded on the Black Mountain Peninsula, the lower slopes of Mount Ainslie, near the Botanic Gardens on Sullivan’s Creek, on the lower slopes of Black Mountain, and on the sand hills which sit beneath Pialligo. Recently excavated test pits near Coppins Crossing suggest that: ‘… this site was used regularly by Aboriginal people as a short-term camp at times during the mid to late Holocene, dating to the last 5,000 years.’10 Over thousands of years Ngunnawal people have maintained cultural connectivity and deep spiritual links to sites, places, icons, and art. 32 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Caring for Country Australia is the driest inhabited continent and Aboriginal people have been living resourceful and resilient lives here for 65,000 years, adapting to conditions, carrying out cultural business and governance. We know that Ngunnawal people have survived and thrived in the Canberra region for more than 25,000 years. Their complex knowledge of Country and water has been critical to their cultural continuity.11 ‘Country’ refers to a bounded geographical area, distinct from one another. Country has intrinsic and cultural value. Ngunnawal people have deep cultural interest in conservation, water and fire management. That knowledge extends to understanding seasonality, taking only what is necessary (see the commentary from Aunty Loretta Halloran inside the front cover of this report), and harvesting routines associated with flora and fauna including: Daisy Yam, wattle seed, fish (Murray Cod and Yellow Belly), yabbies, platypus, water fowl, terrestrial mammals, and Bogong moths in the summer months.12 Looking after Country involves maintaining a balanced physical, social and spiritual environment and contributing to the continuity and renewal of complex relationships between people and the environment. Capacity to care for Country changed in the early part of the 1800s when the Ngunnawal people’s world turned upside down with the arrival of the Europeans establishing farms and settlements. Many Aboriginal people in the region, including the Ngunnawal, were forcibly moved and placed in missions and reserves (specifically at Brungle and Edgerton) which were managed by the Aboriginal Protection Board, where foreign language, customs and religions replaced the Dreaming and Aboriginal Lore. 11 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE), 2018, The Heroic and the Dammed – Lower Cotter Catchment Restoration Evaluation, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0007/1315753/The-Heroic-and-the-Dammed-Lower-Cotter-Catchment-Restoration-Evaluation.pdf 12 EPSDD, 2018, Lower Cotter Catchment Reserve Management Plan 2018, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/3515/1910/2350/Lower_Cotter_ Catchment_-_Reserve_Management_Plan_-_ACCESS.pdf 13 EPSDD, 2018, ACT Water Planning Meeting Minutes, May 2018, Aboriginal Water Assessment Consultations, scribe Mary Mudford, provided by EPSDD 14 EPSDD ACT Water Planning Meeting Minutes, May 2018, Aboriginal Water Assessment Consultations, Scribe Mary Mudford, provided by EPSDD Indigenous voices – water, land and language On water, Aboriginal people voice their contemporary cultural connections about the Molonglo River, Vanity’s Crossing, and Boboyan Swamp in the following ways: ‘… the area is saturated with artefacts.’ ‘… this place is my second home. It was my ancestors’ many years ago.’ ‘… it’s here for us to bring our families, to make our bodies better. I want my grandkids and their kids to know this place.’ ‘… our ancestors used this for a pathway.’ ‘… this is a running billabong; it would be significant for travellers passing as the water source was for camping. This billabong is close running to a rock art site.’13 About the Naas River one Aboriginal person made this comment: ‘… [I am] sad and sick that it is so degraded. Once [it] was a major trade route into mountains for ceremony.’14 33 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report On land, in the context of cool or cultural burning, Aboriginal people have also recently had their voices recorded.15 Wally Bell, Ngunnawal elder, expressed concern that ‘we’ve lost so many sites from residential development’, while Indigenous voices across the 2018 Southeast Australian Aboriginal Fire Forum recited a range of views about Country in respect of fire management: ‘… Country continues to teach us.’ Victor Steffensen, Mulong ‘… we all know this, it’s just a matter of putting it on paper.’ Sally Moylan, ACT Parks and Conservation Service ‘… no matter where you go on the lands of your ancestors, you will always see your footprints.’ Aunty Matilda House, Ngambri Elder ‘… knowledge of burning is not necessarily seen as something that can or should be shared freely without the responsibilities to Country that come with doing it.’ Smith, Weir and Neale 2018, reciting comments from the floor 15 Smith, W., J. Weir, T. Neale, 2018, Southeast Australian Aboriginal Fire Forum. An Independent Research Report, Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre’s ‘Hazards, Culture and Indigenous Communities’ research project (BNHCRC’s HCIC), found at https://www.bnhcrc.com.au/publications/biblio/bnh-4738 16 More information can be found at https://www.communityservices.act.gov.au/atsia/committees/ngunnawal_issues 17 The Canberra Airport is the first in Australia to provide a welcome to Country to international visitors in the local Aboriginal language – the Ngunnawal language. 18 Commissioner, Professor Kate Auty’s personal note of the comments made at the Canberra Airport launch. Tweeted on 9 July 2019 (@Env_Comm) Indicative of their determination to maintain and enliven culture, Ngunnawal people are reviving language, in partnership with the Canberra Institute of Technology’s Yurauna Institute and the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies.16 At the launch of the Canberra Airport’s language collaboration with Ngunnawal people,17 Caroline Hughes, Ngunnawal Elder (of the United Ngunnawal Elders Council) remarked: ‘… we are breathing the breath of life back into language for Country … we have come home.’18 Illustrating the understanding of the gravity of the restoration of language, then Australian Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull, commenced his Closing the Gap speech in the federal parliament in Canberra with Ngunnawal language in 2016. 34 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report WATER: CULTURAL WATER AND INDIGENOUS MANAGEMENT Top of Gibraltar Falls: grinding grooves across the rock face illustrate the pattern of connection. Source: Brad Moggridge. 19 Bradley Moggridge, personal communication to Commissioner Professor Kate Auty, August 2019 20 Moggridge, B. and R. Mihinui, 2010, ‘Guiding principles for Indigenous Cultural and Spiritual Values on Water’, paper prepared for the Joint Steering Committee reviewing the Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for fresh and marine water quality, Canberra. ‘… we need to embrace every possible method of allowing rivers to mend themselves through adopting Aboriginal water practices, and it is timely during drought when Country is sick to allow Aboriginal people to care for their respective countries. We have a customary responsibility to do so.’19 Aboriginal peoples’ world view invokes water as critical to their identity and inseparably connected to the land and sky, bound by Traditional Lore and customs in a system of sustainable management. In a dry landscape, traditional knowledge of finding, relocating, and protecting water sites has been both a cultural responsibility and vital to survive.20 Today this Indigenous knowledge can serve a broader vision of sustainability for all Australia. The underlying message is ‘look after the water and the water will look after you’. 35 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Australian Aboriginal people’s view of the relationship between water, land, culture and people illustrated below:21 H E A L T H Y C U L T U R E H E A L T H Y C O U N T R Y H E A L T H Y P E O P L E HEALTHY WATER Ngunnawal people’s cultural roots extend to caring for their river Country through links to the Murrumbidgee, Molonglo and Cotter rivers, each of which are part of the broader Murray-Darling Basin. Ngunnawal Country is situated in the northern part of the Snowy Mountains which provides strong links and pathways to the coast from the mountains. These water courses and byways follow and represent Songlines and Dreamings here in the southeast, just as they do in other parts of the country. 21 Moggridge, B. and R. Mihinui, 2010, ‘Guiding principles for Indigenous Cultural and Spiritual Values on Water’, paper prepared for the Joint Steering Committee reviewing the Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for fresh and marine water quality, Canberra. Contemporary water management and Indigenous cultural flows Aboriginal people involved in water resource management in the Murray-Darling Basin are represented by Traditional Custodians and the Murray and Lower Darling River Indigenous Network (MLDRIN). The Ngunnawal people have two elected representatives on the MLDRIN Executive. In the early 2000s much of Australia, including the ACT, was gripped by the Millennium Drought. A decade of water reform resulted in reconsideration of methods for the management of water resources for the environment, agriculture, and communities in the Murray-Darling Basin. This process began with the 2004 Council of Australian Governments’ (COAG) National Water Initiative (NWI). As a function of the NWI, all states and territories committed to some Indigenous representation in water planning. They agreed to incorporate Indigenous, social, spiritual and customary objectives, and strategies in planning, and to take account of the possible existence of native title rights to water. Subsequently, the Commonwealth’s Water Act 2007 was established. However, to date no native title determinations of water entitlements have been granted by the courts. Gibraltar Falls, Paddys River, ACT. Source: Brad Moggridge. 36 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report ACT plans and commitments to cultural water Under the Water Act and before water responsibilities were devolved to include Water Resource Plan obligations, the ACT Government commenced a dialogue with Traditional Custodians. This included the 2011–2013 ACT Caring for the Cotter Catchment project and the Murra Bidgee Mullangari ceremony on the banks of the Murrumbidgee River (which brought together the Ngunnawal, Ngambri and Ngarringjeru people). The ACT WRP has been informed by the Murray-Darling Basin Authority’s (MDBA) Aboriginal Waterways Assessment Project (2015) and field trips with Indigenous informants in 2016, 2017 and 2018. It is as a result of this process that Ngunnawal people now have two elected delegates on MLDRIN. This consultation relied upon the Convention for Biological Diversity’s Akwé: Kon Guidelines22 in determining the cultural water and other water interests of Ngunnawal people. The ACT WRP makes the commitment to support Aboriginal objectives, values and uses that have been identified through the engagement activities of water resource planning. The intention is to build on supporting and protecting Aboriginal values and uses through a fit-for-purpose approach via the ACT Water Strategy, the ACT Environmental Flow Guidelines and associated rules that protect flows and a number of land and catchment management plans. 22 Convention on Biological Diversity COP–7, 2004, Akwé: Kon Guidelines, Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Montreal, found at https://www.cbd.int/traditional/guidelines.shtml . The guidelines adopt the following ten principles: ‘Notification and public consultation of the proposed development by the proponent; Identification of indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders likely to be affected by the proposed development; Establishment of effective mechanisms for indigenous and local community participation, including for the participation of women, the youth, the elderly and other vulnerable groups, in the impact assessment processes; Establishment of an agreed process for recording the views and concerns of the members of the indigenous or local community whose interests are likely to be impacted by a proposed development; Establishment of a process whereby local and indigenous communities may have the option to accept or oppose a proposed development that may impact on their community; Identification and provision of sufficient human, financial, technical and legal resources for effective indigenous and local community participation in all phases of impact assessment procedures; Establishment of an environmental management or monitoring plan (EMP), including contingency plans regarding possible adverse cultural, environmental and social impacts resulting from a proposed development; Identification of actors responsible for liability, redress, insurance and compensation; Conclusion, as appropriate, of agreements, or action plans, on mutually agreed terms, between the proponent of the proposed development and the affected indigenous and local communities, for the implementation of measures to prevent or mitigate any negative impacts of the proposed development; Establishment of a review and appeals process.’ 23 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-april-2019.pdf 24 MLDRIN Echuca Declaration 2007, 2010, adopted by MLDRIN delegates on 14 November 2007 and further adopted by NBAN and MLDRIN (with minor edits) at a joint meeting on 19 May 2010, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/sa-mld rin-echuca-declaration-2009_0.PDF 25 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra: 29, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-april-2019.pdf It is commendable that the ACT Government declared that the ‘traditional’ Indigenous environmental management philosophy is respected, supported, and a ‘critical element’ in the preamble to its Water Resources Plan (2019 and 2016 (draft)).23 The ACT Government has also acknowledged and accepted the Indigenous peoples’ 2007 Echuca Declaration’s definition of ‘cultural flows’: ‘Cultural flows’ are water entitlements that are legally and beneficially owned by the Indigenous Nations of a sufficient and adequate quantity and quality to improve the spiritual, cultural, environmental, social and economic conditions of those Indigenous Nations. This is our inherent right.’24 Protection of flows in water catchments, water quality improvement programs and protection of threatened and endangered aquatic ecology contributes to Aboriginal values and uses of water.
 Traditional Custodians can apply for water access entitlements and licences to take water for cultural purposes and traditional activities while unallocated water is available to all Aboriginal people in the plan area.25 37 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Kambah Pool, Murrumbidgee River - a popular swimming spot. Source: https://matthewsherrenphotography.com/. 26 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra: 108, 116, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-april-2019.pdf 27 National Water Commission (NWC), 2014, Australia’s Water Blueprint National Reform Assessment, NWC, Canberra: 31 28 Moggridge, B., L. Betterridge and R.M. Thompson, 2019, ‘Integrating Aboriginal Cultural Values into Water Planning: A Case Study from New South Wales, Australia’, Australian Journal of Environmental Management, 26(3): 273–86. DOI:10.1080/14486563.2019.1650837 Change is slow and culturally complex The ACT WRP recognises that more work needs to be done to develop indicators for informing Indigenous cultural water assessments.26 Even though there is a shift towards including Aboriginal knowledge and science into natural resource management in respect of cultural heritage management (as it is legislated), weather knowledge (seasonal calendars and climate), national park management (co-management), and fire ecology (cultural burning), change is slow. The incorporation of cultural indicators is still an aspiration. In 2009, Australian and New Zealand Environment Ministers resolved to revise the Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for Fresh and Marine Water Quality 2000 and tasked a Joint Steering Committee to oversee the revision process. A key component of the review was to prepare guidance for the inclusion of cultural and spiritual values into water quality management. Several National Water Commission (NWC) reviews have called for change: (in 2009, 2011, 2013, 2014). The 2014 NWC review found that most jurisdictions had: ‘… generally failed to incorporate effective strategies for achieving Indigenous objectives in water planning arrangements. While recognition of Indigenous cultural values and associated water requirements has progressed, implementation of practical change remains variable, with most jurisdictions as yet not making specific provision for water access for Indigenous people.’27 Moggridge and others provide examples of cultural values that are water-dependent and can be protected by water planning instruments.28 38 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The Productivity Commission has recognised the need for further action in respect of Indigenous people’s water rights, describing Indigenous water management as a litany of ‘unfinished business’.29 The Commission recommended that governments should ensure: 1. Indigenous cultural objectives are explicitly identified and provided for in water plans, and progress in achieving Indigenous cultural objectives is regularly monitored and publicly reported on. 2. That there is public reporting of how Indigenous cultural objectives have been considered in the management of environmental water – both held and planned.30 The Commission’s language was very strong on this point – that the protection of Indigenous cultural (water) values should be regarded as a distinct objective of water planning in its own right. Where it is not possible to use environmental flows to support some or all Indigenous cultural objectives, explicit provisions should be made in water plans to address the shortfall.31 Genuine engagement is critical, as outlined in the MDB Plan (Part 14A on Aboriginal values and uses). The clear objective is that water institutions should build on the Akwé: Kon Guidelines.32 The ACT WRP supports an increase in Indigenous representation on the ACT and Region Catchment Coordination Group and the Environmental Flows Technical Advisory Group. In addition to the WRP, the ACT Government has developed the Molonglo River Reserve Management Plan (2019) which establishes the following objectives: • Objective 10: cultural heritage within the Molonglo River Reserve is identified and conserved to retain its significance. • Objective 11: cultural heritage is to be interpreted and (where appropriate) promoted to foster community appreciation of past and continuing connections. Policy initiatives attached to Objective 11 will provide for naming conventions, promotions, active consultation, and documenting cultural knowledge. 29 Productivity Commission, 2017, National Water Reform Inquiry Report, found at https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/ water-reform#report 30 Productivity Commission, 2017, National Water Reform Inquiry Report: 94, found at https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/ water-reform#report 31 Productivity Commission, 2017, National Water Reform Inquiry Report, 94, found at https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/ water-reform#report 32 Convention on Biological Diversity COP–7, 2004, Akwé: Kon Guidelines, Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Montreal, found at https://www.cbd.int/traditional/guidelines.shtml . 33 National Cultural Flows Research Project, 2019, found at http://culturalflows.com.au/ Indigenous research foundations and outcomes As change occurs, governments need to be vigilant about knowledge access, knowledge sharing, and restricted knowledge protocol. These issues have historically been difficult to negotiate, and the breach of etiquette and protocols has the potential to erode the good work done through genuine consultation over time. In 2018 the Northern Basin Aboriginal Nations (NBAN) and MLDRIN, through the National Cultural Flows Research Project (NCFRP),33 accumulated rigorous and defendable knowledge about First Peoples’ water interests and benefits to Aboriginal people. The NCFRP drew on a range of scientific research methodologies and generations of cultural knowledge, including the Aboriginal Waterways Assessment (AWA) methodology. Objectives include: • providing a greater understanding of Aboriginal values relating to natural resources, especially water. • equipping First Peoples with information and tools to ensure that Aboriginal water requirements and preferences are reflected in water policy. • informing the development of new governance approaches to water management that incorporate aspects of First Peoples’ governance and capacity-building. 39 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: NARI NARI ENVIRONMENTAL AND CULTURAL FLOWS AT TOOGIMBIE 34 National Cultural Flows Research Project, 2019, found at http://culturalflows.com.au/ 35 Jackson, S., B. Moggridge and C. Robinson, 2010, Effects of Changes in Water Availability on Indigenous people of the Murray-Darling Basin: A Scoping Study, Report to the Murray-Darling Basin Authority, CSIRO, Canberra. 36 Behrendt, L., and P. Thompson, 2003, ‘The Recognition and Protection of Aboriginal Interests in NSW Rivers’, Journal of Indigenous Policy, 3, found at http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/JlIndigP/2004/4.pdf 37 Moggridge, B., L. Betterridge and R.M. Thompson, 2019, ‘Integrating Aboriginal Cultural Values into Water Planning: A Case Study from New South Wales, Australia’, Australian Journal of Environmental Management, 26(3): 273–86. DOI:10.1080/1448656 3.2019.1650837; Taylor, K., M. Moggridge, and A. Poelina, 2017, ‘Australian Indigenous Water Policy and the Impacts of the Ever Changing Political Cycle’, Australasian Journal of Water Resources, 20, 132–147; Jackson, S., 2018, ‘Water and Indigenous Rights: Mechanisms and Pathways of Recognition, Representation and Redistribution’, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water. Environmental and cultural values can work together, as the Nari Nari Tribal Council (Hay NSW) has demonstrated. There, a re-flooding regime provides a valuable example of how ‘cultural flows’ have supported employment and recreation, economic independence, and the maintenance of connection between people, land, and water. The Council is a water licence holder. As a result of this negotiated outcome, the Council has an established relationship with the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder to access environmental water under the NCFRP.34 The Council is a regular user of the Cultural Access License with 2150 megalitres available annually in the Murrumbidgee water-sharing plan. The Nari Nari currently access water under four categories of license in accordance with the Murrumbidgee Regulated River Water Sharing Plan. These activities are contributing to biodiversity and cultural heritage management within the region.35 Nari Nari Tribal Council Office. Source: https://www.awt.com.au/2014/02/01/ rotary-support-toogimbie-ipa/ . The future: a Framework for Cultural Indicators and a River Rangers program ‘Aboriginal peoples have much to offer and society has much to gain by negotiating an empowering role for Aboriginal people in river management. A proper recognition of the Aboriginal role in river management will be an important step in establishing the economic, cultural and biological diversity necessary for a sustainable and just society.’36 For Aboriginal people, water is an intrinsic part of the landscape (connecting to land and sky) that also holds vast social, cultural and economic importance. This understanding is difficult to align with quantitatively-focused western style water management which separates components of the landscape. Partnerships are critical and cultural monitoring of water would promote understanding, sustainability, ecological and biodiversity outcomes.37 Initiatives can be instituted on a number of scales. Advancing Indigenous cultural and environmental rights and obligations includes practical and operational opportunities as well as larger scale commitments such as the establishment of a Framework for Cultural Indicators (discussed at the end of this chapter). The establishment of a River Ranger program, funded and resourced to work alongside Ngunnawal Traditional Custodians to measure health, would facilitate the design of strategies which would work to heal Country through cultural understanding of water resources and their management. It would also potentially promote greater involvement and build upon the ACT’s commitment to inclusion of Indigenous people at the environmental organisational level. 40 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report LAND: CULTURAL – COOL – BURNING ON COUNTRY Cultural burning on Country. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. ‘On 18 April 1824 botanist Alan Cunningham observed in the Tuggeranong Valley that “these interesting Downs had been burnt in patches about two months since”.’38 ‘The Earth wants to repair itself, that’s the thing; we see it all the time.’39 38 Cited in Flood, J., 1996, Moth Hunters of the Australian Capital Territory. Aboriginal Traditional Life in the Canberra Region, Gecko Books, South Australia. 39 Bruce Pascoe, 2019, ‘Teach your children to rebel. Teach your children to doubt’, in The Guardian (Australian edition). 41 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Cultural, cool, burns have been used as a Country management technique by Aboriginal people across Australia for thousands of years. Burning has been part of a complex range of tools and it is now well recognised that Aboriginal people have managed the Australian landscape, its biodiversity, species, and its food production capacity. 40 Upon the arrival of Europeans this ‘resource’ management ethic was both debilitated and ignored. Recent short-term patterns of production and management have seen a ‘dramatic decline’ in small mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and plants. Bushfire management by cultural burns is actively being studied by western scientists for its capacity as a multifaceted tool – considering timing, location, intensity and suppression – in aiding understanding of ‘ecological dependencies’ and species management (flora and fauna).41 The absence of Indigenous ‘firestick farming’ in the cooler months of the year across the Australian continent is now recognised as one of the factors in producing a build-up of fuel, which in turn has produced the conditions for hotter, more greenhouse-gas-intense fire events.42 These observations clearly have climate change implications and potentially produce mitigation opportunities. In recent decades Indigenous cool burning has been critically assessed for its capacity to address climate change, our post-industrial-revolution challenge. CSIRO and the then Australian Greenhouse Office have long been examining these issues to establish models, produce benchmarks and determine the emissions profiles of fire in savannah country.43 40 Bruce Pascoe, 2014, Dark Emu. Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident? Magabala Books, Broome; Bill Gammage, 2011, The Biggest Estate on Earth. How Aborigines Made Australia, Allen and Unwin, Sydney. 41 The Threatened Species Recovery Hub (National Environmental Science Program)’s ‘Project 1.3 Managing fire regimes to save threatened flora and fauna’ seeks to deal with this complex question, see http://www.nespthreatenedspecies.edu.au/projects/ managing-fire-regimes-with-thresholds-to-save-threatened-flora-and-fauna 42 Research undertaken in northern Australia has been particularly focused on these problems. See the Northern Australia Environmental Resources Hub, found at https://www.nespnorthern.edu.au/projects/nesp/savanna-carbon-sequestration-method/. 43 See for example C.P Meyer, 2004, Establishing a Consistent Time-series of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Estimates from Savannah Burning in Australia, CSIRO Atmospheric Research, Aspendale, found at http://www.cmar.csiro.au/e-print/open/meyercp_2004a.pdf; Bradstock, R. A., M. M. Boer et al., 2012, ‘Modelling the Potential for Prescribed Burning to Mitigate Carbon Emissions from Wildfires in Fire-prone Forests of Australia’, International Journal of Wildland Fire, 21(6): 629–39. 44 The Australian Government has assessed the cool burning method and provided guidance through the Clean Energy Regulator, participating in the Emissions Reduction Fund. ‘A guide to reducing greenhouse gas emissions through the early dry season savanna burning method’ (nd) and ‘Savanna fire management – sequestration emissions avoidance’, 2018, can be found at http://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/ERF/Pages/Choosing%20a%20project%20type/Opportunities%20for%20the%20 land%20sector/Savanna%20burning%20methods/Savanna-fire-management-sequestration-and-emissions-avoidance. aspx. The method continues to be scrutinised, managed and updated, see Department of the Environment and Energy, 2018, Emissions Reduction Fund Method: Savanna Fire Management 2018 (sequestration and emissions avoidance), found at http://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/b4b9222b-8520-48c4-86d6-8d59bc26eb64/files/factsheet-savanna-fi re-management-sequestration-emissions-avoidance.pdf 45 Aboriginal Carbon Foundation, 2016, Savanna Burning, found at http://aboriginalcarbonfoundation.com/savanna-burning 46 The Nature Conservancy Australia, Fighting Fire with Fire, found at https://www.natureaustralia.org.au/what-we-do/ our-priorities/tackle-climate-change/climate-change-stories/fighting-fire-with-fire/ , accessed 2 September 2019 47 Professor Gregory Phillips, Griffith University, commenting on the ABC program The Drum, 11 September 2019, accessed 12 September 2019. Recognising this contribution, Indigenous cool burning has now been afforded ‘carbon credits’ when used to reduce greenhouse gases associated with uncontrolled fires.
44 The Aboriginal Carbon Foundation is ensuring that Aboriginal people receive the benefits of these programs where Aboriginal land is involved.45 NGOs such as The Nature Conservancy have been guided by Aboriginal people sharing their fire and land management practices as part of the culture-and-climate-change process.46 Cultural burns in the south ‘Some fire management departments are starting to listen to Aboriginal science. We weren’t wandering around the bush bumping into a kangaroo. We were sophisticated land management scientists, geologists, engineers, economists, political scientists.’47 Cultural burning is increasingly being returned to the fire and climate change management toolkit in southern Australia. The Indigenous voice on the viability and rationale for adopting cultural burns is everywhere, including in Ngunnawal Country. The ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plans make provision for cultural burning in the Namadgi National Park, reflecting the appreciation of this fire management tool. The ACT Government has now designed an Aboriginal Fire Management Framework (2015) and is deploying it. 42 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Aboriginal Fire Management Framework  Aboriginal Ranger, Adrian Brown, lights a fire for a cultural burn. Source: ABC News. Eucalyptus regeneration after cultural burning. Source: OCSE. 48 Indigenous seasonal calendars have been developed at Byron Bay by the Arakwal people and CSIRO scholar Cathy Robinson, found at http://arakwal.com.au/category/arakwal-corp/, and also in northern Australia. More information found at https://www.csiro.au/en/Research/Environment/Land-management/Indigenous/Indigenous-calendars Since 2015 the ACT Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) has been supporting the community to achieve their aspirations to reintroduce traditional land management through cultural burning. The development of the Aboriginal Fire Management Framework and appointment of the Aboriginal fire manager position within PCS has led to an increase in quality, frequency and legitimacy of burning Country with a cultural focus. Songlines, cultural stories, intergenerational transfer of cultural knowledge, protecting the ‘spirit’ of Country, and community health and wellbeing are woven into the methodology of a cultural burn. The Aboriginal Fire Management Framework sets out specific strategic objectives to assist in the protection of cultural heritage when burning Country. These include: • establishing standard operating procedures for all ACT PCS staff in relation to cultural heritage protection on fire sites. • organising a pool of resources to effectively implement the Aboriginal Fire Management Plan. • re-initiating cultural burning practices in the ACT with Traditional Custodians. A recent example of this is the cultural burn conducted on Gibraltar Peak within Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve. This Country is of high value to the Ngunnawal people as it signifies an important initiation pathway. Before the burn got underway a smoking ceremony was conducted by Ngunnawal Elder, Uncle Carl Brown. He welcomed all the firefighters to his Country before carrying the burning leaves to the highest point of the burn area, using them to ignite the cultural burn with the assistance of the Murumbung Rangers. Uncle Carl’s role in the burn was highly significant as it was a repatriation of an important responsibility for a Ngunnawal Elder to lead the management and protection of his Country. The framework has paved the way for the inclusion of Aboriginal people in the management of their traditional lands. Burning Country allows Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to become skilled in land management and regain knowledge about their culture through learning and doing. It also allows Traditional Custodians to take up leadership and advisory roles about where, when and how their Country is managed. The framework also lends itself to future opportunities. An Indigenous seasonal calendar could be developed to assist in alignment of cultural burns with species needs, continuing the facilitation of fire management as an ecological methodology. CSIRO has been working with Aboriginal people in coastal NSW to give effect to both Indigenous concerns and western practices.48 It is also suggested that the Fire Management Framework could be used to assist in the formulation of a wider Framework for Cultural Indicators (discussed at the end of this chapter). 43 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: SOUTHEAST AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL FIRE FORUM – CULTURAL BURNING: EVOLVING WITH COMMUNITY AND COUNTRY HELD 10–12 MAY 2018­ ­ 49 Smith, W., J. Weir, T. Neale, 2018, Southeast Australian Aboriginal Fire Forum. An Independent Research Report, Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre’s ‘Hazards, Culture and Indigenous Communities’ research project (BNHCRC’s HCIC), found at https://www.bnhcrc.com.au/publications/biblio/bnh-4738. Note: governments across southern Australia are increasingly accepting the need to utilise Indigenous knowledge on burning techniques. For Tasmania, see https://www.aboriginalheritage.tas.gov.au/Documents/AHT%20Fact%20Sheet%20-%20Cultural%20Burning.pdf; Victoria, see https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/media/6817/fireplusstrategyplusfinal.pdf and Volunteer Fire Fighters are also picking up the threads https://volunteerfirefighters.org.au/indigenous-cool-burn-revelation 50 Yurbay, Dharwa Tours, Otis Williams Photography, Wantok Designs, Coolamon Advisers and Black and White Films were some of the Aboriginal businesses engaged as part of the forum. The Southeast Australia Aboriginal Fire Forum was convened in Canberra on Ngunnawal Country to ‘create and share knowledge of cultural burning’. This forum, sponsored by the ACT government, ‘… was particularly significant because it was a landmark gathering of Aboriginal fire practitioners, researchers and government agencies involved in fire management, that focuse[d] explicitly on cultural burning across southeast Australia.’49 Forum objectives were to: • honour experiences and exchange knowledge about cultural burning across southeast Australia • hear from First Nations people, fire agencies and researchers speaking about their work in fire, ecology, land management and caring for Country • consider the future of Aboriginal methods burning in southeast Australia – how are we evolving with community and Country, and • develop a First Nations fire network. The Murumbung Yarung Murra Rangers (Ngunnawal for ‘good strong pathways’) guided the ACT’s contribution to the forum, which included a cultural burn at the Gubur Dhaura ochre site. More than 130 people attended including Traditional Custodian representatives from across south-eastern Australia and from the Northern Territory, Aboriginal professionals working in fire, heritage and natural resource management. Listening to Country, women and young people in fire, and community partnerships were some of the critical themes that emerged. Sharing information is important for achieving reconciliation and education for non-Indigenous Australians. It was acknowledged by all in attendance that we are on that journey now, bringing people’s awareness in ‘a kind, gentle and effective way’. An important part of the Fire Forum was the inclusion of Aboriginal businesses and partners that were involved to assist in the delivery of the forum as well as the report that followed.50 44 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: CULTURAL BURNS – BETTER FOR COUNTRY AND PEOPLE Cultural burning on Country. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. 51 Dean Freeman (Wiradjuri), 2018, ‘Right Country, Right Fire’, Firesticks Alliance: Cultural Burning, Healthy Communities, Healthy Landscapes podcast, found at https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/episode-4/id1463470135?i=1000438035339. Dean Freeman (Wiradjuri man from Brungle Aboriginal Reserve in NSW, Aboriginal Cultural Fire Officer, ACT Parks and Conservation Service), attests to the importance of cultural burns: ‘What we’re trying to introduce is something totally different from the fire regimes they have in place today. So it is a little bit difficult, a little bit scary in places … introducing ancient techniques into a modern world. What we’re trying to do is put the right fire into the right environment at the right time of year. We do it for a bit of fuel reduction, but we also do it so the land can revive itself and it basically cures itself. If you do put a bit of fire on the ground in certain places then it’s like a medicine for Earth. You’re getting rid of the dead stuff, the stuff that’s slowing you down and the stuff that’s pulling you back … we don’t go after a percentage at all, we let the fire do the work and it heals itself as it’s going through the land. … Aboriginal people are always putting forward their land management practices, and this is one of them. What you’re actually trying to do is heal Country. If Country is healing then the people on Country can also heal. The idea is to share the information that we have so we can improve Country. [Cultural-cool burns are critical as out-of-control hot burns] wreck the canopy [and] then you don’t have anything to stop the heat of the sun hitting the ground constantly, every day, and that’s when it starts to dry out. It will harden up and then you’ll lose your plants, lose the dew and it’s basically as hard as concrete. It’s very hard to deal with and manage.’ 51 45 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CULTURAL INDICATORS: A PROPOSAL FOR NGUNNAWAL COUNTRY Aboriginal people are justly concerned that even when inclusive operational efforts are made, their cultural values and indicators of environmental-cultural quality are poorly understood. These cultural values have struggled to be implemented in policy decisions. In 2018, the Commonwealth government provided guidance for including Cultural and Spiritual Values and Principles under the Australia and New Zealand Water Quality Guidelines (ANZWQG). Guiding principles included: 1. All Indigenous people, who have rights and obligations to the body of water being managed, are ensured prior informed consent through adequate consultation. 2. When developing or undertaking activities on a body of water, consideration should be given as to the Indigenous cultural and spiritual values of the site. The ACT Government has commenced adoption of these principles more broadly across several environmental domains, with the: • acceptance of the Echuca Declaration • establishment of the Aboriginal Fire Management Framework (2015), and • development of the Water Resources Plan to meet the requirements of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. Further, the ACT has already considered the benefits of cultural indicators for waterway health when consulting about its Water Resources Plan for the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. These indicators were assessed and then used by the community to determine an initial objective and action that would assist with achieving outcomes for improving the health, use and cultural value of the assessed water sites.52 Arguably, it is practicable to integrate cultural values into water and other environmental planning.53 52 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Water Resource Plans for Surface Water and Groundwater, ACT Government, Canberra: 108, 116, found at https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/act-water-resource-plans-for-surface-water-and-groundwater-april-2019.pdf 53 Moggridge, B., L. Betterridge and R.M. Thompson, 2019, ‘Integrating Aboriginal Cultural Values into Water Planning: A Case Study from New South Wales, Australia’, Australian Journal of Environmental Management, 26(3): 273–86. DOI:10.1080/14486563.2019.1650837 54 Nursey-Bray, M. and the Arabana Aboriginal Corporation, 2015, The Arabana People, Water and Developing Cultural Indicators for Country, Goyder Institute for Water Research Technical Report Series No. 15/29, Adelaide, found at http://www.goyderinstitute. org/_r182/media/system/attrib/file/173/15-29_Arabana_Indicators_web.pdf A ‘principles’ approach has been adopted in the past. The NSW Aboriginal Water Unit through the Aboriginal Water Initiative (AWI) worked to resolve this Indigenous-western cultural indicators tension in a constructive manner. Aboriginal values were installed through a ‘principles approach’ as a key part of water management. Strong governance was affected by: • establishing a clear and transparent model for engagement • developing well-articulated cultural protocols at team and departmental level • ensuring adequate and ongoing funding for community engagement and communications resources • building relationships of trust • building early understandings of a mutual water language, and • providing strong leadership and executive sponsors. It may now be time to advance a conversation with Ngunnawal people which brings all this work together in a Framework for Cultural Indicators. The ACT has the opportunity to lead this discussion in the south. Adopting such a framework could present the potential for paradigmatic change to measure environmental-cultural health through water and land indicators. Critically, Indigenous involvement in the development of a Framework for Cultural Indicators would: • continue to engage Ngunnawal people on their Country, promoting their roles in respect of assessments of threats, trends, uses and pressures • foster ongoing consultation with Indigenous groups • assist in understanding seasonal change • create opportunities for documenting water issues at local scales • create tangible means (via the Indicators) by which other stakeholders can ‘see’ Indigenous aspirations, and • develop methods to integrate two knowledge systems and have the potential to be integrated into other (scientific) indicator management frameworks.54 46 02 Ngunnawal Country.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report A framework could be built around an Information Agreement that promotes research and international exchanges in respect of cultural mapping, aid access to public lands, promote the collection of and access to data, ensuring the return of data to Ngunnawal people. Benefits of developing Cultural Indicators are extensive and include: • promoting Aboriginal people’s rights and ability to speak with authority on and about country • increasing the understanding of cultural values and perspectives when dealing with land and water managers • clearly identifying potential cultural or other conflicts • building Aboriginal people’s research skills • advancing the prioritisation of culturally significant sites and places, and • providing a formal basis for monitoring and measuring trends on cultural health status of country and for the identification of further projects and partnerships. Fundamentally, a Framework for Cultural Indicators would also build structural security into who holds Indigenous information for future use, addressing one of the long-term issues around cross-cultural research agendas and processes. Potential indicators are found in the work of Nursey-Bray and the Arabana people from South Australia.55 It is clear they can reference the following matters – Cultural water: surface and groundwater; Land: cultural plants, species and cultural uses of land; cultural burning; cultural sky; and pressures and threats. The following flow chart provides an indication of how the process might be undertaken: 55 Nursey-Bray, M. and the Arabana Aboriginal Corporation, 2015, The Arabana People, Water and Developing Cultural Indicators for Country, Goyder Institute for Water Research Technical Report Series No. 15/29, Adelaide, found at http://www.goyderinstitute. org/_r182/media/system/attrib/file/173/15-29_Arabana_Indicators_web.pdf Identify potential Cultural Indicators (water, land, fire, and pressure/threat) Workshop the suitability of indicators with Ngunnawal people Establish a research agreement with Ngunnawal people and researchers Select Cultural Indicators with Ngunnawal people Ngunnawal people to map Cultural Indicators on Country and score the health of Country and identify the threats Identify appropriate data that matches Cultural Indicators Report against the Cultural Indicators, actions and knowledge data Recommend management strategies to address Indicators with poor cultural health Ongoing monitoring and evaluation for the health of Cultural Indicators 47 02 Ngunnawal Country.
03 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 03 COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP IN SUSTAINABILITY AND SCIENCE Section contents Recommendations 49 Introduction 49 The value of environmental sustainability action in the ACT 50 Environmental value of volunteers 50 Economic value of environmental volunteering 51 Health and the social value of environmental volunteering 52 Young people make a contribution 53 Older people make a contribution 55 Activism, advocacy and agency 56 Environmental sustainability: variety and activity in cities 59 Natural Resource Management (NRM) 61 Natural Resource Management on public land 63 Natural Resource Management on private land 67 Citizen science – science, the public and the environment 70 What is citizen science and why is it important? 71 Citizen science in and around Canberra 71 Citizen science – the arrival of the digital 75 48.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendation 8: continue to explore the use of ‘deliberative democracy’ for environmental initiatives in accordance with the aspirations of the ACT Whole of Government Communications and Engagement Plan 2019 and in collaboration with the Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 Community Liaison Team. Recommendation 9: specifically provide for the recognition of citizen science and community environmental action with a targeted awards program. 1 It is the mission of the Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE) to promote community engagement and act as an independent voice for the environment and sustainability in the ACT, see https://www.envcomm.act. gov.au/about/our-values. OCSE connects with schools, academic institutions, volunteers and administrators, and not for profit organisations. The community has been generous and enthusiastic, sharing their knowledge about places of environmental, social, economic and cultural importance, and about localised action in places they love and respect, however unremarkable these places might or might not be to others. OCSE thanks every citizen scientist and environmental volunteering organisation that has contributed a case study to this chapter. 2 UNESCO, 1997, Educating For a Sustainable Future: A Transdisciplinary Vision for Concerted Action, paragraph 14, found at http://www.unesco.org/education/tlsf/mods/theme_c/mod17.html 3 European Commission, 2013, Science for Environment Policy in Depth Report. Environmental Citizen Science, found at https://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/IR9_en.pdf; Environment Protection Authority (EPA) Victoria citizen science projects, found at https://www.epa.vic.gov.au/our-work/programs/citizen-science-program/ citizen-science-projects. 4 Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability Victoria, 2011, Many Publics Participation Inventiveness and Change, found at https://www.ces.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/publication-documents/CPreport12_LR-bookmarks.pdf 5 Moreno S.P. and V. Romero, 2018, Capacity Building and Synergies Across the Biodiversity-related Conventions, International Union for Conservation of Nature, found at https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/capacity_building_and_synergies_-_ contribution_to_the_long-term_strategic_framework_for_capacity_building.pdf 6 Capacity-building priority areas identified by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) 2016 Paris Committee on Capacity Building can be found at https://www.transparency-partnership.net/system/files/document/ WRI-building_capacity_PA-ETF.pdf INTRODUCTION1 ‘The kind of change required by sustainability implicates each community, each household, each individual. Successful solutions to problems at this level of society will need to be rooted in the cultural specificity of the town or region if the people are to be supportive of and involved in such change.’ 2 Promotion of participatory processes in environmental contexts has become the norm internationally, nationally and locally, and this is increasingly reflected in environmental and other reports.3 Participatory processes are a powerful driver of the changes that many people believe to be essential if we are to become a sustainable society, ready and willing to deal with climate change, and able to arrest environmental degradation.4 While governments enter into binding agreements to address global challenges, there is increasing recognition that the implementation of such commitments requires the engagement, buy-in and action from all stakeholders, including the broader community.5 Building and mobilising capacity is a process that takes time and requires communities to ‘learn by doing.’6 Environmental sustainability activity involves symbolism and practicality, and at its best it explores unique community attributes, of which the ACT has many and much to offer. 49 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The ACT Government is committed to dialogue between insiders and outsiders, acknowledging it has the potential to fundamentally shift the discussion.7 8 The ACT community is enthusiastic to be involved.9 Citizen science and environmental volunteering is valuable in environmental policy design, and in monitoring and management. Further, social capital and resilience are generated through volunteering.10 Volunteering exposes the community to a range of new technologies and promotes intellectual engagement with new media. 11 12 Technology is being used to bring people to citizen science projects.13  The Australian National Museum’s FrogID program involving the community in innovative use of data and audio in 2019 was awarded the Eureka Prize for Citizen Science.14 Canberra Nature Map, an element of NatureMapr, received a Banksia Award in 2018.15 7 See: Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability Victoria, 2011, Many Publics Participation Inventiveness and Change, found at https://www.ces.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/publication-documents/CPreport12_LR-bookmarks.pdf 8 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD), 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate- Change-Strategy-2019-2025.pdf/_recache 9 Feedback can be provided at https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/ 10 Rowland, K., 2012, Citizen Science Goes ‘Extreme’, Nature, 17 February, DOI:10.1038/nature.2012.10054 11 Irwin, A., 1995, Citizen Science: A Study of People, Expertise and Sustainable Development, Routledge, Oxford; Bonney, R. et al., 2009, ‘Citizen Science: A Developing Tool for Expanding Science Knowledge and Scientific Literacy’, BioScience, 59(11): 977–84, DOI:10.1525/bio.2009.59.11.9; Roy, H.E., et al., 2012, Understanding Citizen Science and Environmental Monitoring. Final Report on behalf of UK Environmental Observation Framework, found at www.ukeof.org.uk/documents/ understanding-citizen-science.pdf; Wiggins, A. and K. Crowston, 2011, ‘From Conservation to Crowdsourcing: A Typology of Citizen Science’, Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 1–10, DOI:10.1109/ HICSS.2011.207. 12 See, for example, Raddick J.M. et al., 2010, ‘Galaxy Zoo: Exploring the Motivations of Citizen Science Volunteers, in Astronomy Education Review, 9(1), 010103. DOI: 10.3847/AER2009036; Graham, E.A., S. Henderson and A. Schloss, 2011, ‘Using Mobile Phones to Engage Citizen Scientists’, in Research. Eos, 92(38), 313–15.; also see Haklay, M., 2012, ‘Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information – Overview and Typology of Participation’, in D.Z. Sui, S. Elwood and M.F. Goodchild (eds), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, Springer, Berlin, DOI: 10.1007/978–94–007–4587–2_7. 13 Australian Citizen Science Association Project Finder, found at https://biocollect.ala.org.au/ acsa#isCitizenScience%3Dtrue%26isWorldWide%3Dfalse%26max%3D20%26sort%3DdateCreatedSort 14 Eureka Prize 2019, found at https://australianmuseum.net.au/get-involved/eureka-prizes/2019-eureka-prize-winners/ 15 https://naturemapr.org/ THE VALUE OF ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY ACTION IN THE ACT Volunteers come from all walks of life. They contribute vastly divergent skills and qualifications, across different cultures and demographics. The value proposition is environmental, economic and social, and for the volunteers themselves there are marked health benefits. Environmental value of volunteers Benefits of the contributions made by environmental volunteers include: • unparalleled local knowledge of the surrounding environment and conditions • local species knowledge • physical labour – planting, weeding, removing debris • monitoring and evaluation 50 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report • administration and management of environmental group activities • education and raising awareness of local environmental issues • encouraging practices which support the needs of present and future generations, and • caring for injured wildlife. The environmental value of volunteers continues to flourish, and it lies in the inherent connection to and passion for nurturing one’s own patch, whether that be through Aboriginal Natural Resource Management (NRM) on Country, measuring rainwater, or picking up rubbish at the local bus stop. Numbers of environmental volunteers continue to grow with ACT organisations such as Frogwatch illustrative of this.16 Every year new volunteers join the program. For many people it is a steppingstone into other NRM related activities. After receiving training, volunteers are active during the spring census. Many volunteers return to undertake monitoring year after year. This is especially so if the volunteer has a designated site they feel connected to. 16 https://landcare.nsw.gov.au/groups/act-region-frogwatch/ 17 The State of Volunteering in the ACT 2013, cited in Community Services Directorate, 2017, Consultation Paper, ACT Volunteering Statement Action Plan 2018–2019: 4, ACT Government, Canberra 18 OCSE, 2017, Environmental-Economic Accounts for ACT State of Environment Reporting, Proof of Concept, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/publications/environmental-economic-accounts Economic value of environmental volunteering To replace the level of environmental volunteering with paid employment would be inconceivable. It would be cost prohibitive and strip the community of its agency in relation to environment, biodiversity, sustainability, and climate change issues. The economic value of volunteering cannot be understated. A 2013 report cited in the ACT Volunteering Statement Action Plan 2018–201917 found that ACT volunteers contributed $1.5 billion to the ACT economy annually. Environmental volunteers make a significant contribution. The OCSE Environmental Economic Accounts Proof of Concept 201718 estimated the value of volunteer activity to be in excess of 22% of total ACT Government expenditure on the environment. Replacement cost in wages was: • 2013–2014: expenditure of $49.2m • 2014–2015: expenditure of $49.8m • 2015–2016: expenditure of $50.5m. 51 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Health and the social value of environmental volunteering Volunteering contributes to the wellbeing and functioning of individuals, businesses and government. Opportunity Direct Cost Cost Physical Capital Commercial Benefits Civic Benefits Individual Benefits Symbolic Capital Human Capital Social Capital Volunteering 19 Sloane G.M. and U. Pröbst l-Haider, 2019, ‘Motivation for Environmental Volunteering – A Comparison Between Austria and Great Britain’, Journal of Outdoor Recreation and Tourism, March, 25: 158–68 20 Pillemer K. et al., 2010, ‘Environmental Volunteering and Health Outcomes over a 20-Year Period’, Gerontologist, 50(5): 594–602. 21 Australian Psychological Society, Resources for Advocacy on Climate Change, found at https://www.psychology.org.au/ About-Us/What-we-do/advocacy/Advocacy-social-issues/Environment-climate-change-psychology/Resources-for-Psychologis ts-and-others-advocating 22 O’Brien, L. et al., 2008, Environmental Volunteering: Motivations, Barriers and Benefits, Report to the Scottish Forestry Trust and Forestry Commission, Deakin University, Victoria, found at https://www.deakin.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/310748/Forestry-UK-report.pdf 23 Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability Victoria, 2011, Many Publics Participation Inventiveness and Change, found at https://www.ces.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/publication-documents/CPreport12_LR-bookmarks.pdf 24 https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/wellbeing Volunteering promotes social relationships between generations, genders and people, healthier and more active lifestyles, and it gives purpose, including a feeling of giving something back to nature and the community.19 Research reinforces a positive association between environmental volunteering and health and wellbeing outcomes. Persons volunteering for the environment maintain higher levels of physical activity, and report better self-rated health and fewer depressive symptoms.20 21 Communities benefit from environmental volunteering, with improved cohesion and access to green spaces. Arguably, organisations that foster community involvement in decision-making and participation will be in the best position to increase capacity, build resilience, and respond to change.22 These collaborations do not simply extend possibilities and numerically increase groups, they open lines of communication, enable sharing of deep insights and thoughtful proposals for action.23 As the ACT Government develops its Wellbeing Framework, about which the community is being invited to comment, the benefits of environmental volunteering will become increasingly relevant.24 52 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report YOUNG PEOPLE MAKE A CONTRIBUTION As the Young Canberran of the year Dhani Gilbert remarked: ‘There are so many people working to create positive change. Even just seeing the other nominees for the Young Canberra Citizen of the Year Awards was a real confirmation for me of that.’25 CASE STUDY: COMMUNITIES@WORK ISABELLA CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION CENTRE 25 Quote extracted from Her Canberra 2019, found at https://hercanberra.com.au/peoples/dhani-gilbert/ Isabella Plains Child Care and Education Centre is one of a number of centres south of Lake Burley Griffin that is required through Communities@Work to implement a Sustainability Action Plan to support environmentally sustainable practices for children, families and educators. Key areas for environmental action include waste, paper consumption, purchasing of food, water and energy conservation, reusing resources, rubbish and chemicals, and exploring outdoor and indoor learning environments. Lids for Kids project During July 2019, children, families and educators at Communities@Work Isabella Plains Child Care and Education Centre collected milk, juice and soft drink bottles for Lids 4 Kids. The lids will be converted into prosthetic hands for children. With a little extra help from community partners, the initial goal of 1,000 lids was exceeded. The final count was 4,499 lids and 362 bread tags. This simple sustainability initiative diverted waste from landfill and resulted in something much more meaningful. Lids for Kids milk bottle lid collection. Source: Communities@Work. 53 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: ACTSMART SUSTAINABLE SCHOOLS – ACTION AND LEADERSHIP AMONG YOUNG PEOPLE Actsmart waste audit at St Bede’s Primary School. Source: OCSE. Arawang Primary is one of many schools that have worked on building sustainable practices over several years as part of the Actsmart Schools program. The importance of maintaining a school ‘culture of sustainability’ is paramount and has been embedded into planning and the curriculum. Commencing with waste management, the school has a staff team who look after sustainability initiatives, implementation and management. Arawang students in classes K–6 nominate two young ‘waste warriors’ per class. It is their role to act as leaders in sustainable waste practices. The aim is for students to take ownership of these practices. Every Tuesday, Arawang hosts ‘Waste Free Tuesday’ where students are encouraged to bring ‘nude food’. Waste warriors collect waste data on participants from each class and reward the winning class with a sustainability certificate. Compost from across the school is used to support the growth of fruit, vegetables and herbs. When composting, students begin to understand sustainability by monitoring and maintaining the kitchen garden and being part of the garden-to-plate movement. Arawang also has ‘energy savers’ who walk the halls during the breaks and monitor which classes have left lights, fans or monitors on. This data is collected and shared with classes to motivate reduction in electricity usage. Recognition and rewards are offered fortnightly to increase engagement. 54 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report OLDER PEOPLE MAKE A CONTRIBUTION CASE STUDY: AGEING AUSTRALIANS AND ADAPTATION 26 https://www.cotaact.org.au/ 27 Personal communication at meeting between OCSE and COTA ACT, 13/5/2019. 28 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE), 2017, Implementation Status Report on ACT Government’s Climate Change Policy, ACT Government, Canberra. Social cohesion, health, environmental and economic benefits flow on from engaging older people in physical and sustainable activities. Seniors invariably remark, ‘we always turned off lights’, ‘we always sorted our waste’. The Council on the Ageing (COTA) for the ACT 26 advise that factors limiting participation in physical exercise and outdoor activities for older people include: • sustainability and physical activity can be less of a priority than food or access to medical treatment • proximity of access to public transport can be a constraint • there is a tendency to suffer in silence • social isolation is real and compounding, and • there can be a heavy reliance on incidental physical activity.27 Climate change will further exacerbate these limiting factors. Unpredictable conditions, such as extreme heat and cold temperatures, will restrict incidental activity such as walking to the bus stop or gardening. Social isolation and mental health problems may be compounded. This has the potential to impact government health budgets.28 COTA ACT is providing services for seniors, but seniors are giving back, getting involved, and leading. Sustainable action taken by seniors include: • solar installations on COTAs building as an example of leadership • sharing resources – COTA has established a second-hand book lending library, tools are shared, clothing is recycled • ad hoc carpooling • household energy audits • community gardening, and • flexible bus use. This range of actions represents a localised and informal ‘adaptation strategy’ and it promotes resilience without the need to draft a ‘plan’ or raise a ‘strategy. 55 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report ACTIVISM, ADVOCACY AND AGENCY Community ‘activism’ differs from community sustainability efforts, and both differ from citizen science. Each has value. Some initiatives will be useful symbolically, as advocacy, and others will produce practical outcomes such as monitoring and evaluation. The Canberra Environment Centre Eco-Shout29 and Meetup30 platforms work specifically to connect likeminded individuals. Solutions-based groups include Climate Solutions ACT and SE Region,31 Canberra Eco Club,32 and Canberra Vegan Meetup.33 Organisations like Girls Ride Bikes, ACTforBees, Canberra Ornithologists Group, and Women in Environmental Leadership, focus on particular concerns. The Canberra City Farm offers intensely practical opportunities to engage with environmental issues, food security, and waste. ACTforBees lobbied the ACT Government for pollination to be considered in urban forest planning instruments. In response, the ACT Government’s recent Municipal Infrastructure Standard (number 25) describes the pollination benefits of plantings in its list of ‘Plant Species for Urban Landscapes’ for developers and others. ‘This is a valuable resource for us all to plant for year round flowering to feed bees, butterflies, birds, small mammals and threatened migratory species. ACTforBees urges developers and Government planners to use this information to create a year round banquet of flowers for our local biodiversity.’34 Universities, specifically the ANU, UNSW, and the University of Canberra, bring people together to discuss the big issues. The Active Travel Office of the ACT Government links with girls and women riding bikes.35 Communities@Work aligns government with social and sustainability programs like OzHarvest. These photos are a sample from the Office’s work with community sustainability leaders and activists. 29 More information can be found at http://www.ecoshout.org.au/active-groups/canberra-environment-centre 30 More information can be found at https://www.meetup.com/en-AU/topics/environmental-activism/au/canberra/ 31 More information can be found at https://www.meetup.com/en-AU/Climate-Solutions-ACT-Region/ 32 More information can be found at https://www.meetup.com/en-AU/CanberraEcoClub/ 33 More information can be found at https://www.meetup.com/en-AU/Canberra-Veg-Events/ 34 Personal communication between OCSE and ACTforBees, 13/9/2019. 35 More information can be found at https://www.girlsonbikesact.com.au/ 56 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 57 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: CANBERRA AND THE SCHOOL STRIKE FOR CLIMATE ACTION – ADVOCACY AND SYMBOLISM 36 Groch, S., 20/9/2019, ‘Everything You Need to Know about Today’s Climate Strike – and Why it Matters’, The Canberra Times, found at https://www.canberratimes.com.au/story/6395031/everything-you-need-to-know-about-todays-climate-strike/ accessed 31 October 2019. 37 Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, 2019, Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2019. found at http://elibrary.gbrmpa.gov.au/jspui/bitstream/11017/3474/10/Outlook-Report-2019-FINAL.pdf 38 http://www.indianmynaaction.org.au/ May 2019 Student Climate Strike, Canberra. Source, left: https://the-riotact.com/the-next-glob al-climate-strike-is-happening-and-this-time-we-n eed-everyones-support/322750; middle, right: OCSE. ‘These [school] strikes are a real game-changer because we’re seeing kids who are afraid for their future speaking out and their parents are joining in, their communities are joining in. And the signs! I love the signs.’36 The Student Strikes for Climate Action, organised using social and other media, mark a new phase in climate activism and advocacy. Strikes across the country have given encouragement to the Extinction Rebellion movement. Canberra’s community turned out in numbers for both events: 15,000 people attended the climate strike in September 2019 and 500 rallied for Extinction Rebellion in October 2019. While initiated by students, people of all ages voiced three clear demands: 1. An end to new fossil fuel projects threatening the Great Barrier Reef. 2. A target of 100% renewable energy by 2030. 3. Funding for a just transition to new jobs for fossil fuel workers. This school strike movement has come at a highly important time for environmentalists in Australia as it is linked to many regional concerns, including the long-term outlook for the health of the Great Barrier Reef.37 CASE STUDY: CANBERRA INDIAN MYNA ACTION GROUP – PRACTICAL ACTION AND A SCIENTIFIC SUBMISSION At the other end of the spectrum from the school strikes, on a very practical level, the Canberra Indian Myna Action Group (CIMAG)38 includes retired scientists and community members working to link environmental concerns and citizen science, to raise awareness and reduce the impact of this exotic avian invader on native birds and animals. CIMAG has developed a strategy that includes community education and collaboration with other like-minded groups, physical bird trapping and disposal methods, monitoring, and evaluation. Numbers of Indian Mynas in reported areas continue to increase, despite CIMAG trapping efforts, but without this community-led action, populations may have exceeded manageable numbers as is the case throughout much of south-eastern Australia. Since inception in 2006 to September 2019, there have been 2,470 people undertaking trapping, removing 71,200 Mynas from the Canberra environment. As a result of its research, monitoring and eradication work CIMAG produced a robust submission to the ACT Government calling for the Myna population to be declared a ‘key threatening process’. 58 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY: VARIETY AND ACTIVITY IN CITIES 39 Coady, S., 13/10/2018, ‘Civic’s Public Servants Volunteer to Improve Garden Beds’, The Canberra Times, found at https://www.canberratimes.com.au/story/6001838/civics-public-servants-volunteer-to-improve-garden-beds/; https://www.environment.act.gov.au/home/Bush-Capital/2019/could-you-adopt-a-park accessed 31 October 2019. 40 ACT Government media release, 23/5/2019, Supporting Your Urban Open Spaces, found at https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/open_ government/inform/act_government_media_releases/act-transport-canberra-and-city-services-media-releases/2019/support ing-your-urban-open-spaces 41 More information can be found at https://actlandcare.org.au/volunteer/ 42 More information can be found at https://www.accesscanberra.act.gov.au/app/answers/detail/a_id/1458/~/act-parkcare 43 More information can be found at https://www.volunteer.com.au/environment-conservation-volunteering/in-canberra-city Environmental volunteering and community sustainability actions do not only find a place in the wild, national parks, or on rural agricultural properties. Environmental volunteering is increasingly important in cities. Volunteer groups in Canberra include City Walk (public servant) volunteers,39 urban Landcare groups, ‘Friends of’ groups, urban open space volunteer groups,40 urban agriculture groups, tree maintenance groups, graffiti removal and community art groups. Their activities are as diverse as the groups themselves and include weeding, planting, urban artwork, litter collection, urban beautification, tree maintenance, erosion control and design, development, and maintenance of community gardens. This snapshot of community sustainability efforts is just that – a snapshot. There are many government, not-for-profit and community led organisations such as Landcare,41 ParkCare,42 and conservation volunteer groups43 that work hard to assist and guide the management of the ACT’s natural resources, and which promote early adoption of responses to emerging environmental issues. The work of some of these groups is discussed below. CASE STUDY: BEES AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE Beehives and products at Australian Parliament House. Source: Cormac Farrell. The Australian Parliament House beehives were established in 2017. There are two species of bees kept, the European Honeybee (Apis mellifera) and the Australian Native Stingless Bee (Tetranogula carbonaria). The honeybee apiary is in the outer garden of Parliament surrounded by almost 30 hectares of honey-producing flora, while the stingless nature of the native bees means that they can be housed within the courtyards of Parliament itself. In addition to providing enjoyment and locally sourced honey for events, the initiative is intended to raise awareness of threats to global bee populations, and their importance to our food supply. The apiary is being managed as a joint venture between the Department of Parliamentary Services, Aurecon and the ANU Apiculture Society. The beehives are also used for scientific research and are currently being used to test Internet of Things technology (IoT) as part of a global network of remotely monitored hives. 59 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: APARTMENTS, CANBERRA ENVIRONMENT CENTRE AND THE ‘HUNGRY COMPOSTER’ Apartment dwellings present a challenge for the waste sector, particularly if their green waste goes to landfill. The Canberra Environment Centre’s Hungry Composter demonstrates the potential for a decentralised organic waste management approach to overcome this problem. In 2017, the Canberra Environment Centre received funding under the ACT Government’s Community Zero Emissions Grants to purchase and install a solar-powered On-Site-Composting-Apparatus in their Acton community garden. The centre had previously been processing small amounts of food scraps from the surrounding childcare centres and university kitchens but wanted to expand their capacity in order to raise awareness about the increasing need to divert organic waste from landfill. The machine – ‘The Hungry Composter’ – can process 100 litres of food scraps per day, which is much higher than traditional composting methods. The centre has encouraged local apartment dwellers to sign up to the project. Within a fortnight they reached capacity with 140 individual compost contributors. Local residents brought their food scraps to the centre in buckets and deposited them in specially marked bins. The machine was fed the scraps by a roster of volunteers supplemented by Salvation Army work experience contributors. Apartment dwellers were also taught how to better manage their food waste at home. The Hungry Composter shows that the community is supportive of initiatives to reduce waste. It also demonstrates the value of utilising technology to increase composting capacity and provide a low emission method of organic waste disposal. The Hungry Composter. Source: Canberra Environment Centre. 60 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (NRM) Parks and Conservation Service Rangers assist Parkcare volunteers. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. ACT Natural Resource Management (NRM) is one of 56 regional NRM organisations across Australia and is hosted by EPSDD. It was allocated $3.8 million through the ACT NRM regional delivery of the National Landcare Program. Around 64% of this funding is devolved directly to the community through community-based delivery partners. ACT NRM works with volunteers, the broader ACT and regional community, and other stakeholders to identify investment priorities, broker partnerships, share knowledge, and deliver programs. The funding received is centred around four strategic investment projects focusing on Matters of National Environmental Significance, Sustainable Agriculture and Aboriginal NRM. These projects include: • supporting Aboriginal NRM in the ACT • Communities Supporting Conservation: managing and restoring Native Temperate Grasslands, Box Gum Woodlands and river corridors in the ACT • supporting sustainable agriculture in the ACT, and • administration and Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting and Improvement (MERI). 61 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: ABORIGINAL NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 44 EPSDD 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–2025, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cc/act-climate-change-strategy 45 https://www.accesscanberra.act.gov.au/app/answers/detail/a_id/2075/~/ngunnawal-plant-use-field-guide 46 EPSDD, Aboriginal NRM, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/act-nrm/aboriginal-nrm 47 More information can be found at https://www.health.act.gov.au/services-and-programs/aboriginal-and-torres-strait- islander-health/ngunnawal-bush-healing-farm Ngunnawal heritage site. Source: OCSE. Recognising the unique value of Indigenous ecological and cultural knowledge, the ACT Government has committed to exploring ways to support and share this remarkable Australian contribution to environmental sustainability.44 Aboriginal people in Ngunnawal Country have embraced the possibilities. Ngunnawal Plant Use field guide The Ngunnawal Plant Use field guide45 has been a popular learning resource for the community and a means to disseminate knowledge about Aboriginal NRM46 to both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people. The guide has assisted in developing understanding and respect for Aboriginal ecological knowledge in schools and education programs, local business and in the broader community. The guide was produced through a partnership between local Ngunnawal Elders and their families and the ACT Government, to capture and record traditional plant knowledge in contemporary contexts, to preserve that knowledge for future generations, and to promote greater appreciation of the cultural heritage values of native vegetation in the region. Indigenous engagement in Box Gum Woodland restoration The Ngunnawal Bush Healing Farm47 advances the dual goals of reconciliation and Indigenous capacity-building in the ACT through a volunteering program which recognises the co-benefits of cultural immersion, nature, and wrap-around care. The Farm has been engaged as part of the Box Gum Woodland restoration project to facilitate traditional cultural practices on Country that promote health and wellbeing amongst disadvantaged Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. So far the Indigenous community has been involved in replanting and monitoring 12 hectares of the site, with further opportunities arising in traditional fire management, soil preparation, weed control, pest management and redistributing coarse woody debris. 62 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Natural Resource Management on public land Natural Resource Management (NRM) in the ACT’s nature reserves, national parks, urban parks and public open spaces is shared between the ACT Government and a range of citizen scientist groups, volunteer groups and not-for-profit organisations. The two main programs are ParkCare and Urban Parks and Places Volunteering (UPP). EPSDD has the primary responsibility for ParkCare and Transport Canberra and City Services (TCCS) for UPP. These programs are only possible due to the contributions of hundreds of regular volunteers and the involvement of more than 45 Landcare and ParkCare groups. The programs undertake a range of critical NRM activities including weed control. Parkcare 2019 marks the thirtieth anniversary of Parkcare in the ACT. Volunteer involvement in Parkcare is growing with the contribution of volunteers doubling over the past five years with each year seeing increased numbers of volunteers reporting more hours.48 48 ACT Parks and Conservation Service, 2019, ParkCare Annual Report 2018, ACT Government, Canberra 49 More information can be found at http://canberra.naturemapr.org/Community/Location/2028 In 2018–2019, Parkcare had 807 registered volunteers contributing 32,048 total volunteer hours. There are four main streams of ParkCare: • ParkCare Patch: volunteering which takes place within any of the established ParkCare groups in the ACT who look after their ‘patch’. This component contributes most of the volunteer hours for Parkcare (66% in 2018–2019) and includes activities such as weed removal and site rehabilitation. • VisitorAssist: a team of specialist visitor services volunteers who are experts at environmental interpretation. • RangerAssist: volunteers work alongside PCS staff to contribute to projects and initiatives throughout the ACT. • WildlifeAssist: volunteers work with the Tidbinbilla Wildlife team to care for, protect, and conserve native animals at Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve, including threatened species recovery programs. CASE STUDY: PARKCARE – GRIFFITH WOODLAND VOLUNTEER GROUP – THE NEWBIES Formed in March 2018, the Griffith Woodland Volunteer Group has been able to achieve some remarkable results within their first year. Their site, located off La Perouse Street in Griffith, contains significant remnant woodland trees, shrubs and grasses, all characteristic features of endangered Box Gum woodland. Some of the group’s achievements include: • community working bees to remove woody weeds • cataloguing flora and fauna on Canberra Nature Map49 • completion of a master planting plan for the site by a local landscape designer • community members planting 335 native wildflowers and grasses on the site • over 110 hours of volunteer labour to the site • successfully submitting for a small grant from the Friends of Grasslands to conduct spraying of invasive grasses, and • success in fundraising efforts, with funds being used to purchase more plants. This work is a great example of community stewardship and the positive results it can achieve in a short period of time. 63 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: PARKCARE – FRIENDS OF ARANDA BUSHLAND WEED CONTROL AND THE SNOW GUMS HERITAGE AREA – AN OLDIE AND A GOODIE  Weed control of Aranda Bushland in 2000. Source: The Canberra Times. Snow Gums Heritage Area in 2019. Source: OCSE. Formation of the Friends of Aranda Bushland 50 More information can be found at http://www.friendsofarandabushland.org.au/ 51 EPSDD, ACT Heritage Register, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/heritage/heritage_register/register-by-place In the early 1990s the Friends of Aranda Bushland50 ParkCare group formed to conserve and rehabilitate the eucalypt forest and woodland that had become a mass of weeds. The group comprises many ACT scientists and community members. The Aranda Bushland is a 100 hectare reserve and forms part of Canberra Nature Park. Within this area there is a patch of Snow Gums that have survived from the last ice age, the only remaining Snow Gums along the Molonglo River corridor. Due to both their historical and ecological significance, these Snow Gums were declared a Heritage Area in 1998.51 Seed provenanced by the ‘Friends’ from this remnant stand has been used for further Snow Gum propagation. Friends of Aranda Bushland have spent thousands of hours using various techniques to weed the area and it is now largely free of St John’s Wart and Patterson’s Curse. The group also undertook extensive weed monitoring over a 12 year period to determine trends in weed distribution and abundance. This grassland monitoring provides an important contribution to weed knowledge, particularly in the light of climate change impacts. Friends of Aranda Bushland continues to manage weed control and maintains a keen interest in vegetation monitoring, awaiting a feasible long-term method that provides new information. 64 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: PARKCARE – ADFA RANGERS ASSIST ON MT PLEASANT ADFA cadets on Mt Pleasant. Source: EPSDD. 52 More information can be found at https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/city-living/public_areas/volunteering 53 Based on the Volunteering Australia standard of $33.71 per hour for volunteer labour. The Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) has participated in multiple corporate volunteer activities with ParkCare after developing a strong relationship with the Mount Pleasant ParkCare Group. Over two separate events, more than 130 international cadets from countries including Papua New Guinea, France, Indonesia and Fiji worked with ParkCare volunteers and PCS staff to remove invasive plants in the reserve system. Participants were able to learn about invasive native species and further develop their teamwork skills. The organisational structure of Defence participants has been highly productive. Urban Parks and Places Volunteering The Urban Parks and Places Volunteering (UPP)52 program allows the community to contribute to the conservation, presentation, and maintenance of Canberra’s many public urban open-space areas, including parks, playgrounds, grasslands, shopping centres, wetlands and lake surrounds. In 2019, 34 groups were registered with the UPP program contributing 2,057 volunteering hours. The number of volunteer hours in 2018–2019 equates to nearly $70,000 in value.53 As with Parkcare, volunteer involvement in UPP is also growing with the contribution of volunteers increasing by over 800 volunteering hours between 2017–2018 and 2018–2019. The program will expand in the future with four new volunteer groups commencing activities in Holder, Aranda, Campbell and along the Molonglo River, and some new initiatives to be launched in 2019–2020 to support the UPP program. This will include the introduction of the Better Impact online volunteer platform to register and maintain volunteer records. 65 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 1: Urban Parks and Places Volunteer Groups Source: Transport Canberra & City Services, City Presentation. www.tccs.act.gov.au 66 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Natural Resource Management on private land Native propagation and replanting. Source: EPSDD. In addition to public areas, ACT NRM works closely with rural land holders and organisations such as Greening Australia and ACT Catchment Groups (Ginninderra, Molonglo and Southern ACT) to manage biodiversity and build the resilience of landscapes to support the Landcare community on privately owned land. This work has depended on the substantial contribution of volunteers. Over the 2015 to June 2018 period, the average annual volunteer participation was: • 2,437 total registered volunteers • 7,599 total volunteering hours, and • 210 volunteer activities 67 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: COMMUNITIES SUPPORTING CONSERVATION The Communities Supporting Conservation project focuses on improving the condition, extent and connectivity of Matters of National Environmental Significance (MNES) in Box Gum woodlands, Native Temperate Grasslands, and River Corridors in the ACT and surrounding border regions. The project operated from 2014–2018. The ACT Government collaborated with four main community partners to deliver the targets of the project, Molonglo, Ginninderra and Southern ACT Catchment Groups, and Greening Australia Capital Region. This collaboration enables increased community engagement leading to improved skills, knowledge and awareness. On ground site selection was based on ACT Government priorities, feedback from ACT rural landholders and Indigenous stakeholders, and advice from the ACT NRM Council. The main activities undertaken by volunteers included revegetation, weed and pest control, conservation grazing and fencing, fire management and erosion control. In addition, community engagement activities were undertaken for purposes such as improving education and increasing participation. Key on ground biodiversity management achievements are shown below. REVEGETATION 104,210 2,505 trees planted over 1,555 ha of weed control achieved and ha 3,378 ha completed Initial target was 1,320 ha of native vegetation Initial target was 2,370 ha Initial target was 440 ha of pest animal control 29 209 of fencing over 494 ha ha of fire trails 50 ha of slashing km 840 of community activities achieved days 81 erosion controls over 157 ha Initial target was 25 km over 410 ha Initial target was 200 ha of fire trails and 50 ha of slashing Initial target was 38 erosion controls Initial target was 264 days of community activities WEED TREATMENT PEST MANAGEMENT CONSERVATION GRAZING AND FENCING COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT FIRE MANAGEMENT EROSION MANAGEMENT Figure 2: Communities Supporting Conservation program, key on-ground biodiversity achievements undertaken between 2015 and June 2018. Data sourced from: Greening Australia 68 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE – LANDCARE AND RURAL LANDHOLDERS Paddock of African Lovegrass. Source: Catherine Kiernan. ACT rural landholders have been engaged as individuals and in groups with the active support and guidance of the ACT Landcare Facilitators, and in partnership with various ACT and NSW Government agencies. Rural landholders have been undertaking sustainability activities for many years. Their observations, feedback, and engagement in skills and technical programs have been critical to improve environmental outcomes in the management of private land. Activities have included: • Soil health improvements, including a National Landcare Program Regional Land Partnership to deliver a $330,000 soils program from 2018–2023. • Pest animal eradication with a strong focus on rabbit control; other animals pests controlled include pigs and deer. • Support for drought resilience initiatives, including a National On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme distributed to 8 ACT rural landholders to improve water management techniques. • Blackberry control in the Ginninderra Catchment to improve connectivity and riparian land recovery in the Lower Molonglo. In addition, between 2014 and 2018, the rural grants program provided $447,000 to promote environmental sustainability by fencing areas of high conservation value, promoting cross-farm collaborations, protection of mature paddock trees, and the provision of advice. Twenty-eight farmers received direct grants and 11 have had the benefit of advice. More than 3,500 hectares of practice change across ACT rural lands has been achieved, including: • 1,594 hectares of grazing management through fencing projects on 14 properties • 525 hectares of pasture and groundcover protection by feed lot development • 1078 hectares of collaborative weed control across seven farms • 136 hectares of cropping and pasture establishment to address African Lovegrass on three farms • 95 hectares of innovative porous electric fencing on one farm • 21 hectares of rabbit control across two farms, and • 12.4 hectares of riparian protection on two farms. 69 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CITIZEN SCIENCE – SCIENCE, THE PUBLIC AND THE ENVIRONMENT The ACT has a long tradition of citizen science which is now being boosted by digital technologies, encouraging new and diverse cohorts of the public to contribute to knowledge, sustainability activities and advocacy. Problem definition Policy implementation Policy adoption Policy evaluation Citizen science Impact Science Supplemented Open Policy Fit for purpose Extended evidence based Citizens Contribute to something bigger Aware Policy formation Figure 3: The three main pillars of citizen science in the policy cycle: scientific excellence, citizen engagement, and policy relevance. Source: Bio Innovation Service for the European Commission, 2018.54 54 Bio Innovation Service, 2018, Citizen Science for Environmental Policy. Development of an EU-wide Inventory and Analysis of Selected Practices, Final report for the European Commission, in collaboration with Fundacion Ibercivis and The Natural History Museum, found at https://www.rri-tools.eu/-/citizen-science-for-environmental-policy-development-of-an-eu-wide-inventor y-and-analysis-of-selected-practices accessed 21 October 2019. 70 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report What is citizen science and why is it important? Citizen science is scientific work undertaken by members of the general public, often in collaboration with, or under the direction of, professional scientists and scientific institutions.55 Citizen science projects can involve non-professionals taking part in crowdsourcing, data collection and analysis to increase scientific knowledge. This is often achieved by breaking down complicated research and monitoring tasks into understandable components that non-specialists can perform.56 57 Professor David Lindenmayer, an internationally respected scholar, celebrates the role of citizen science and its capacity to produce valuable data and information that can be used for environmental reports and policy. ‘There are examples where long-term studies have produced valuable information, even when they have not been guided by carefully crafted scientific questions, where no formal conceptual model was used to identify those questions, and there was a noticeable absence of a statistical-based experimental design.’ 58 55 Definition taken from Citizen Science Center website, found at http://www.citizensciencecenter.com/citizen-science-definition/ accessed 21 October 2019. 56 S.Legge et al., 2018, Monitoring Threatened Species and Ecological Communities, CSIRO Publishing, Canberra. 57 https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-citizen-science–16487 58 Lindenmayer, D. and G.E. Likens, 2018, Effective Ecological Monitoring, CSIRO publishing, Canberra: p175. 59 TM and JC Van der Heul have been studying fungi for 25 years and have found more than 500 species of fungi and approximately 50 species of myxomycetes (slime mould). Tubifera vanderheuliae was named in their honour earlier in 2019. 60 More information can be found at https://citizenscience.org.au/acsa-act-region/ 61 More information on becoming a citizen scientist can be found at https://actlandcare.org.au/volunteer/become-a-citizen-scientist/ Citizen science in and around Canberra  Left: Auricularia auricularia. Right: Armillaria hinnulea. Photos taken by citizen scientists of the ACSA ACT and Region chapter. Source: TM and JC Van der Heul, Box Cutting Rainforest NSW.59 The ACT and Region chapter of the Australian Citizen Science Association (ACSA)60 was launched in early 2019 reflecting the demand for ACT representation. The chapter helps to build awareness of citizen science in the community, identifies priority projects and provides a communication channel from the local to national level, and beyond. With its high concentration of scientists, national and international science agencies and an eager community, Canberra is neatly placed to make a significant contribution to science through the exchange of ideas. The ACT is dependent on community programs and organisations for a range of monitoring data including: • Waterwatch supplies the data required for the ACT’s Catchment Health Indicator Program (see Water section). • Frogwatch provides data on frog distributions and abundance. • Canberra Ornithologists Group provides much of the available data on bird distribution and abundance, and • Landcare has provided links and opportunities for citizen scientists over a long period of time. 61 The benefits of citizen science are many: it vastly increases the amount of monitoring both in terms of frequency and coverage, and the work is often undertaken by community members who have ready access to, and an intimate knowledge of, the sites they are reporting on. Without citizen science, many aspects of environment knowledge would be severely limited. 71 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: WATERWATCH – DATA FOR ACT RIVER ASSESSMENT AND POLICY 62 Australian Platypus Conservancy, found at https://platypus.asn.au/  Waterwatch volunteer water monitoring activities. Source: Waterwatch. The Waterwatch program is undertaken by over 200 volunteers who monitor water quality every month at 243 sites around the ACT region. The monitoring undertaken covers a total area of more than 11,400 square kilometres. In 2018, Waterwatch provided data from 2,081 water quality surveys, 192 water bug surveys, and 220 river vegetation assessments. The success of the program over the past five years is evident in the increased uptake of Waterwatch data. The program has gone from being an underutilised data set to one that sits within an integrated monitoring framework for the ACT region (see Water section). For example, the data collected by Waterwatch volunteers is used for Catchment Health Indicator Program (CHIP) reporting in the ACT. Data also feeds into the Atlas of Living Australia and the work done by this group of citizen scientists is increasingly informing government policy, including: • The ACT Water Strategy 2014–2044 has an outcome to ‘Improve water monitoring and analysis across the ACT and region’, where it highlights ‘Better integration of Waterwatch activities into a broader monitoring program’ as one of the actions. • The Canberra Capital Metro project used Waterwatch data to help establish a historic baseline along the project’s alignment. • The ACT Government’s Biodiversity, Research and Monitoring Program, Aquatic and Riparian Ecosystems Monitoring Plan, Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program and ACT Integrated Water Monitoring Plan all rely on Waterwatch data. • A catchment model (Source) is intending to use Waterwatch electrical conductivity data to calibrate salt export rates from the ACT. • Icon Water is using Waterwatch data as part of their three-year sanitary survey to determine the nature and extent of likely contaminants entering the catchments. • The Snowy Monaro Council obtained a $100,000 NSW Environmental Trust Grant in 2016 for restoration works on the Cooma Creek. The grant contained a combination of platypus data obtained during Waterwatch’s Platypus Month and the results on Cooma Creek from the CHIP report. Platypus at Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve. Source: https://canberra.naturemapr.org/Community/ Sightings/Details/3361933. In addition to river monitoring, Waterwatch conducted a Platypus census in August 2018. The census consisted of 24 surveys conducted by over 100 volunteers across the ACT region. This is twice the number of surveys done in previous years, greatly improving survey effort and increasing confidence in the data. Despite the increased survey effort, platypus numbers were consistently down over all sites. A total of 11 individual platypus were sighted over the six reaches surveyed down from 16 individuals in 2017. Rakali (Water Rat) numbers totalled 6 individuals in 2018, down from 11 in 2017. These results are likely due to the drought conditions in 2018. Dry autumn and winter conditions have been linked to fewer platypus sightings in the following breeding season. 62 Dry conditions affecting river flows could also explain the record number of platypus sightings in Lake Burley Griffin over August. Both in the ACT and nationally, our understanding of platypus numbers and population dynamics is very limited. Every piece of research and data gathered by citizen scientists adds to the picture and better enables us to protect this iconic species. 72 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: FROGWATCH – MONITORING, TRAINING AND TECHNOLOGY 63 Westgate, M.J. et al., 2015, ‘Citizen Science Program Shows Urban Areas Have lower Occurrence of Frog Species, but Not Accelerated Declines’, PLoS ONE, found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0140973; Hoefer, A.M. and D. Starrs 2016, One Pond Fits All? Frogs as an Indicator of Urban Wetland Health. Final report to Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, Ginninderra Catchment Group, Canberra, found at http://www.act.waterwatch.org.au/Files/frogs/Hoefer_Starrs_ Wetland_Indicator_Final_Report.pdf 64 https://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2019–10–05/rise-of-citizen-scientists-thanks-to-advances-in-technology/ 65 https://www.engineersaustralia.org.au/News/iot-frogphone-monitors-endangered-species Frog monitoring technology. Source: ABC News. Top: Peron’s Tree Frog. Source: Ryan Colley. Bottom: Frog spawn. Source: https://ginninderralandcare.org.au Data on the ACT’s frog species are collected by around 200 Frogwatch members annually, with many local Landcare and Parkcare groups also undertaking Frogwatch activities. Training is an important component of Frogwatch. All Frogwatch volunteers are trained on how, when and where to monitor frogs ensuring accurate citizen science data are collected. This includes the use of digital technology to: • audio-record frog calls • measure air and water temperature • assess weather conditions, pond conditions and the surrounding landscape, and • enter data into an online portal. All data and frog calls are scientifically verified before being included in the Frog census data. Frogwatch is planning to reduce the number of monitoring sites in the region from 500 to 200 to ensure that every site is monitored annually, making the data more robust and meaningful. These sites will represent different landscapes and habitat types and align with other monitoring programs such as Waterwatch. Many scientific publications incorporate Frogwatch data, including in the fields of frog population dynamics, habitat and management recommendations, and climate change impacts. 63 64 To improve data collection and accuracy, FrogPhone65 has been developed in collaboration with the University of Canberra. FrogPhone is the world’s first remote frog survey device based on mobile phone technology. The device will revolutionise the community’s capacity to undertake accurate frog surveys. The combination of citizen science and digital technology are demonstrating strong potential for biodiversity monitoring across a range of species. 73 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: CANBERRA ORNITHOLOGISTS GROUP – DATA FOR BIRD CONSERVATION 66 Canberra Ornithologists Group, 2019, Canberra Bird Notes, 44(1), Canberra Ornithologists Group, Canberra. Canberra and the surrounding region has the richest bird life of any Australian capital city – over 200 species have been recorded here. From our largest bird, the Emu, to the smallest, the Weebill, the birds of Canberra present an ever-changing kaleidoscope of sizes, shapes, colours and sounds. The Canberra Onithologists Group (COG) collects bird observations made by community members. This data is published in COG’s annual report and used for the Birdlife Australia Atlas. The data collected is extensive, for example in 2017–2018, 251 bird species were recorded and 176,679 observations recoded.66 Surveys are undertaken for garden birds, woodland birds and waterbirds. COG also conducts an annual ‘Bird Blitz’ in the last week of October. These initiatives enable COG to record the species of birds present in the ACT across a wide variety of habitats. The data provides valuable insights into changes in the distribution, abundance and breeding status of birds in the ACT. Such information, particularly when recorded over a long period of time, is key for the detection of environmental changes that impact on bird species, both within and outside of the ACT. The data provided by COG is fundamental for the conservation of birds in the ACT, particularly threatened species, informing the need for potential management interventions and providing feedback on the effectiveness of current strategies. Examples of COG data and research can be found in section 5.5 Biodiversity. Horsfield’s Bushlark on a wire. Source: Ryan Colley. 74 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 67 https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-citizen-science-16487. An example of digital technology being used and useful is Zooniverse. This program has a global community of more than 850,000 people who have taken part in more than 20 citizen science projects internationally. In the last year alone, people collectively volunteered almost half a million hours, which amounts to one person spending 52 years analysing data. Most users on Zooinverse do little and some users do staggering amounts, discussion at https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-citizen-science-16487 68 Discussed in https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-citizen-science-16487; found at https://www.zooniverse.org/ CITIZEN SCIENCE – THE ARRIVAL OF THE DIGITAL ‘We are at the beginning of a citizen science renaissance online. After hundreds of years, beyond the purview of bug-collectors and bird-watchers (all very important work, I hasten to add), we are finally able to tap into the cognitive surplus – the population’s free time – and attempt truly distributed research.’ 67 Armed with phones that have built-in cameras and GPS receivers, volunteers can now provide geo-location information about species or environmental conditions in real time providing the community with the opportunity to submit data from anywhere, at any time. In addition, the development of applications will increase the accuracy of species identifications (see Frogwatch case study). Online citizen science participation is already revolutionising community capacity to report on the distribution and abundance of flora and fauna species. It also promotes collaboration and assists volunteers by making data collection easier, faster, and more engaging across a wider demographic.68 75 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: CANBERRA NATURE MAP – REVOLUTIONISING MONITORING 69 Found at https://canberra.naturemapr.org/ 70 Birdlife Australia website, found at https://birdlife.org.au/bird-profile/gang-gang-cockatoo accessed 15 October 2019. Canberra Nature (NatureMapr)69 is an authoritative source on wildlife distribution and abundance in the ACT region. It is made up of over 2,000 existing private databases of citizen scientist and local naturalist groups and it is updated with reported sightings every day. It has been recognised for environmental excellence at the Banksia Awards 2018. Over 1,166,000 animal, plant and fungi records of 5,044 species have been loaded into the Canberra Nature Map portal. This information is used daily by land managers, park-carers, consultants and government decision-makers, enabling more informed actions. All users can add to the communal knowledge base by uploading a wildlife photograph or sound recording and suggesting an identification. Over 80 expert volunteer moderators audit the posts for accuracy. NatureMapr is ‘intuitive’, caters for all levels of expertise and educates as well as engages. Citizen science entries on Canberra Nature Map are having a revolutionary impact on conservation understanding and management actions. Spider Orchid – critically endangered in the ACT The Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis) occurs only in the ACT. Prior to Canberra Nature Map it had two known locations with a total population of 250 plants. 155 individual sightings later, it is now known at five locations with a total population of around 800 plants. This has implications for plant genetics as well as climate change resilience. New weed incursions Since 2015, there have been 3816 weed sightings of 570 weed species. On over 200 occasions either government workers, park-carers or the reporting individual have taken action to control new incursions of 85 high risk weed species. Sightings include 89 accounts where a species was recorded in a specific reserve for the first time, a great outcome for stopping weed infestations. Pictured: Madagascan fireweed. Small Ant Blue Butterfly In February 2018, a Small Ant Blue Butterfly (Acrodipsas myrmecophila) was identified on Canberra Nature Map. This was only the second ACT record of this rare butterfly. The species has a complex and dependent relationship with an attendant, the Coconut Ant (Papyrius nitidus). A group of volunteers were trained in the identification of Small Ant Blue caterpillars, pupa and adult butterflies. Searches were made in areas with high concentrations of Coconut Ant nests, resulting in 344 sightings. Specialised training in conjunction with digital technology has increased sightings. The Small Ant Blue is now known in five of the ACT’s reserves. Gang-gang Cockatoo – vulnerable in NSW70 Despite several thousand recorded sightings of Gang-gang Cockatoos (or Gang Gang for short, Callocephalon fimbriatum), only two active nest trees within Canberra were known in 2018. Canberra Nature Map citizen scientists were asked to observe and record Gang Gang behaviour around suitable tree hollows and make repeated observations. Six nesting trees are now known, while about 40 highly likely nest trees have been identified for targeted observation this coming breeding season. 76 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: WHAT’S YOUR REALITY? VIRTUAL REALITY AT CALWELL HIGH Calwell High students working with PCS for ‘What’s Your Reality?’. Source: EPSDD. 71 More information can be found at https://ywca-computerclubhouse.org.au/whats-your-reality-a-journey-through-virtual-worlds/ 72 The Parallel Parks program is found here http://m.newhorizons.org.au/parallel-parks/ ‘What’s Your Reality’71 is a project where students from Calwell High School volunteered their time to produce nature based virtual reality (VR) content for the National Disability Insurance Service (NDIS). The program won the Innovation in Service Delivery Award at the Youth Coalition of the ACT YOGIE Youth Work Awards in 2019. Students worked with the YWCA Clubhouse and ACT Parks and Conservation Service to plan, film and produce nature-based VR experiences in a pilot program providing footage for the ParksVR platform. Using innovative technology, the team created a product which translates experiences and locations to people with ability or other limitations that are unable to have a direct connection with nature. These experiences were showcased by Muscular Dystrophy NSW in December 2018. Forty young people with muscular dystrophy were able to experience fire training, bushwalking, swimming, bike riding and learning about the threatened species of Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve for the first time. Once ‘inside’ the VR, each participant fell silent as they were lost in the adventure. Everyone was delighted by the control they had over the images, enjoying the freedom of being able to spin in their electric wheelchairs and independently choose what they wanted to see. One participant commented that he was so convinced by the VR video of a boat rolling over, that he held his breath when the camera was under water! The volunteer students also felt an impact from this work. Many of the students captured and shared their first encounters with our parks and reserves. Students went from being unaware of what was available, to understanding how to enjoy nature, to being ambassadors for our parks The ‘What’s Your Reality’ suite of VR experiences has now been provided to New Horizons which will continue to share the experiences with the disability sector through the established ‘Parallel Parks’ program.72 This will dramatically increase the reach and diversity of people who will be able to experience our parks and reserves in the ACT. 77 03 Community leadership in sustainability and science.
04 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 04 URBAN TREES IN THE ACT – NATURE IN THE CITY Section contents Recommendations 79 Urban trees in Canberra 79 Benefits of urban trees 80 Urban trees 84 ACT initiatives from 2015 to 2019 84 Safe and useful lives of trees 85 Urban development pressures 85 Climate change pressures and implications 87 The lives of trees in Canberra 93 Maintaining trees in Canberra 93 Tree Protection and the Tree Register 94 The future – Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City  96 78.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendation 10: advance Action 1 of the Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019) by convening an environmental-economic accounts steering committee with representatives from government, academics and the community. Recommendation 11: continue to collaborate with other jurisdictions and research institutes to generate the evidence base for appropriate urban forest understorey and other plantings, having specific regard to climate change implications. URBAN TREES IN CANBERRA ‘There is a magic machine that sucks carbon out of the air, costs very little, and builds itself. It’s called a tree.’ 1 Canberrans have enthusiastically embraced a commitment to urban trees for aesthetic and other reasons. Tree canopy, the associated ecosystem services, and biodiversity values are critical features of the Bush Capital’s urban forest. Remedying the ‘largely treeless site’, wind exposure, and ‘degraded shallow soils’,2 was a focus of the early work of Charles Weston3 and Lindsay Pryor. 1 Found at https://www.conservation.org/blog/nature-now’-in-new-film-climate-heavyweights-make-plea-for-the-planet accessed 20 October 2019. 2 National Capital Authority (NCA), 2019, Our Trees website, found at https://stage.ourtrees.com.au/ accessed 20 October 2019. 3 1911 plantings of 2 million trees at the direction of George Weston was the beginning of the urban forest in Canberra. Wanniassa scar trees. Source: OCSE. 79 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The ACT Government has committed to increasing both tree canopy cover (equivalent) and permeable surfaces to 30% across the city by 2045,4 but this target needs to be seen in the light of a 10% reduction in urban canopy between 2009 and 2016.5 This loss of canopy cover was mainly due to dieback and senescence – both significant issues that require immediate intervention and ongoing research. In 2015, Canberra’s urban open space and road reserves had a canopy cover of 22%; canopy cover on residential land was 18%. The average tree canopy cover across urban areas in Canberra was measured at 19%, with established suburbs having more canopy cover compared to newer developments.6 Responsibility for the urban forest and canopy cover is onerous and shared across government: • Transport Canberra and City Services (TCCS) currently has obligations for an estimated 767,000 trees which are governed by a regulatory framework. • TCCS receives, on average, between 8,000 and 10,000 tree-related public enquiries each year about how the urban forest is being maintained.7 • The National Capital Authority (NCA) manages 18,000 trees and reports a canopy cover on its (Commonwealth) land of 33%,8 and • Protection of significant groups of trees and of individual trees on Commonwealth land is provided by the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. 4 EPSDD, 2019, Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City, ACT Government, Canberra. https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__ data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1413770/Canberras-Living-Infrastructure-Plan.pdf 5 202020 ACT Vision 2017 report, found at https://202020vision.com.au/media/72931/wsattg_act_fa3_lr.pdf accessed 20 October 2019. 6 Jacobs, B., N. Mikhailovich, and C. Delaney, 2014, Benchmarking Australia’s Urban Tree Canopy: An i-Tree Assessment, Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney. 7 OCSE has a statutory function to investigate complaints from the community. Recently the Office has received several complaints about tree management practices: • A London Plane Tree in Manuka, about which the Conservator of Flora and Fauna, the National Capital Design Review Panel (Interim) and the ACT Administrative Appeals Tribunal have now made determinations; and • The need to replace trees lost or damaged during development. Complaint management follows a formal process, complainants receive responses to all interim inquiries, and these matters are reported in annual reports. Legislation which works to protect the Territory’s tree cover includes the Tree Protection Act 2005 and the Heritage Act 2004. A provisional tree register and a tree register are used to track the protection of heritage trees and tree scapes, including tree-lined streets. For details of complaints see OCSE Annual Reports. The Tree Register can be found at https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/city-living/trees/act_tree_register accessed 29 October 2019. 8 The most recent NCA tree initiatives are on the Our Trees website, found at https://ourtrees.com.au/ accessed 29 October 2019. 9 Haig Park was in fact established to reduce the impacts of wind. See the report on its revitalisation, found at https://www.act. gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1222806/16_36_Haig_Park_Place_Plan_July_17_1.pdf accessed 29 October 2019. 10 S. J. Livesley, E. G. McPherson, and C. Calfapietra, 2016, ‘The Urban Forest and Ecosystem Services: Impacts on Urban Water, Heat, and Pollution Cycles at the Tree, Street, and City Scale’ in Journal of Environmental Quality, 45: 119–24 11 Science Daily 6/7/2018, ‘It’s Official: Spending Time Outside is Good for You’, found at https://www.sciencedaily.com/ releases/2018/07/180706102842.htm; White, M.P. et al., 2019, ‘Spending at Least 120 Minutes a Week in Nature is Associated with Good Health and Wellbeing’, Scientific Reports, 9(7730), found at https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-44097-3 accessed 30 October 2019. 12 NaturePlay Qld, found at https://www.natureplayqld.org.au/ accessed 30 October 2019.
 BENEFITS OF URBAN TREES Urban trees provide many services including: • spiritual and cultural wellbeing through links to the city’s cultural history – both Indigenous and non-Indigenous • recreational opportunities • land health • carbon abatement • climate regulation through shading and cooling reducing heat impacts and energy consumption • support for biodiversity by providing habitat and pollination • reduction of dust, pollution, wind9 and UV radiation • management of storm water run-off • tourism, property value and business centre benefits.10 Urban forests also provide significant human health benefits with exposure to green space reducing the risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, premature death, preterm birth, stress, and high blood pressure.11 They also have a range of benefits for children with more outdoor time improving health and learning.12 80 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 81 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city Mitigate wind Reflected light Particulate deposition CO2 uptake Rainfall interception and evaporation Runoff reduction / water retention Nutrient uptake Cooling through shade Cooling Urban heat island implications Runoff reductions and filtration The benefit of trees TREES IN THE LANDSCAPE STREET TREES URBAN FOREST Pedestrian human thermal comfort Habitat Energy savings from shade Improved water quality in urban water systems Particulate pollution reduction.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: ARANDA PRIMARY SCHOOL – A WATER-HARVESTED NATURESCAPE Aranda Primary School at completion of the naturescape construction work. Source: Paul Barnett, Paul Barnett Design Group. Aranda Primary School 3 years after completion. Source: Paul Barnett, Paul Barnett Design Group. ‘We have observed the children’s play gradually evolve into a more imaginative social experience [in this naturescape]. We are excited by the way children have developed and display a more creative and diverse range of activities in a natural environment that does not predict and determine how a child’s activity may be experienced, as with swings and slippery dips and climbing frames.’ (Phil Gray, Principal at Aranda Primary School) At Aranda Primary School a dry creek bed and a micro forest now provide a natural water-harvesting system and environment for child’s play. This natural water-harvesting system was first developed by Paul Totterdell and has been utilised in many educational, residential and urban settings over several decades. The Aranda Primary naturescape masterplan identified several areas that could be converted to a naturescape system including the central courtyard, upper terrace, sloped field and oval sport area. The sub-surface was trenched to capture water from rain, runoff, and water redirected from the natural catchment area and nearby roofs. The surface landscape was integrated, mimicking nature. This landscape includes rocks, tree logs, plants, trees and earth contouring, which works to move, hold and direct the water, and to increase biodiversity. Aranda’s central naturescape has two parallel trenches sitting on two terraces with sandpits, rock tables and pathways zigzagging through the naturescape. A hundred tonnes of rock, 120 lineal metres of water-harvesting trenching, and 32 trees have been installed. The wetlands and frog bog were a more simple design aimed at catching overland flow past classrooms, holding water at the edge of gently sloped play spaces, and creating a tree lined pathway and wetland space beside the path. The playing field space is supported by a criss-cross of water-harvest trenches which enable the grass to be kept alive for longer periods over the summer months, minimising irrigation during hot and dry periods. Water can be fed directly into the trenches rather than air sprayed, thereby minimising evaporation and reducing the need for irrigation. 82 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: BIRDSCAPING 13 This case study has been provided by Edwina Robinson, the Executive Officer of SEE-change, Canberra. 14 Further information on the ACT Scientific Committee can be found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/advisory-bodies/ act-scientific-committee 15 The ACT Government also maintains unmown parks; the point made here relates to more cultivated spaces. An ANU birdscaping volunteer. Source: Edwina Robinson. SEE-Change’s Birdscaping #CBR13 project was inspired by ACT Scientific Committee research.14 In 2015 the Committee concluded that Canberra’s small woodland bird, the Scarlet Robin (Petroica multicolour), classified as ‘vulnerable’, was at risk of premature extinction in the next 20–25 years principally due to ongoing habitat loss. Canberra’s relatively simple layout of mature trees and mown grass lacks the dense understorey that many of these woodland birds need to nest, forage, shelter, and hide from larger birds and other predators.15 The concept SEE-Change came up with, in consultation with the community, was to plant native grasses, climbers, shrubs and forbs beneath existing mature trees in O’Connor. The project was funded by a $43,000 environment grant from the ACT Government in 2017. SEE-Change factored in the cost of watering (a Greening Australia employee with a water cart) and the heavy work of spreading mulch and removing weeds into the grant application, while the Molonglo Conservation Group did the hard work. Canberra Ornithologists Group recorded the number of birds on the site prior to planting and will follow up with regular bird surveys. With the help of Greening Australia ACT and ACTforBees, SEE-Change developed a list of local native plants that would provide habitat for small woodland birds and pollinators. A total of 2000 grasses, forbs, groundcovers, climbers, trees and shrubs were grown from locally sourced seed, provided by Greening Australia. To protect them from wood ducks and cockatoos the plantings were surrounded by waxed cardboard guards. Logs and insect hotels were added to encourage beneficial insects into the space. More than 100 people participated in the working bees in 2018. Turner Primary School and a local scout group worked on the project. These kinds of projects connect people and encourage the community to make a positive impact in their local area. Despite January 2019 being the hottest Canberra summer on record with temperatures 6oC above average, most of the plants have thrived, due to good soil preparation and follow-up watering. This suburban revegetation project provides habitat and enhances landscape connectivity while cooling the suburb. 83 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report URBAN TREES A 2018 CSIRO study commissioned by the ACT Government to inform Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019) valued the public urban forest at $3.4 billion; assessed the annual benefits of the urban forest at $27 million; and attributed the recreational value of non-sports grounds as $24,000 per hectare, and $76,000 per hectare for sports grounds. A study undertaken by AECOM in 2017 reported that a $50,000 increase in the value of real estate followed a 10% increase in tree canopy.16 In Blacktown (in a study which should be read with some care due to a number of variables), the Cool Street Pilot Project 2015–2016 suggested energy savings of up to $800 annually from improved tree canopy.17 ACT INITIATIVES FROM 2015 TO 2019 The ACT’s urban forest has been the subject of a number of initiatives since 2015. The ACT Government’s Actsmart Plant Selector Guide of 201718 helps the public to choose plants suitable for the Canberra region, which is largely descriptive. The Municipal Infrastructure Standard 25 (2019) augments this with indicators about pollination properties of trees, shrubs and other flora.19 16 AECOM, 2017, Green Infrastructure. A Vital Step to Brilliant Australian Cities, found at http://www.aecom.com/content/ wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Green-Infrastructure-vital-step-brilliant-Australian-cities.pdf accessed 20 October 2019. 17 Gallagher Studio and CRED Consulting, 2016, Blacktown: Cool Street Pilot Project, 2015–2016, found at http://www. gallagherstudio.com.au/blacktown-cool-streets-pilot-project accessed 20 October 2019. 18 Found at https://actsmart-plantselector.com.au/browse-plants/ accessed 20 October 2019. 19 Transport Canberra and City Services (TCCS) 2019, Plant Species for Urban Landscape Projects, Municipal Infrastructure Standard 25, ACT Government, Canberra. Found at https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1378543/MIS25- Plant-Species-for-Urban-Landscape-Projects.pdf accessed 20 October 2019. 20 For more information, go to https://actforbees.org/ accessed 20 October 2019. 21 City Renewal Authority 2018, Haig Park Place Plan, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.act.gov.au/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0017/1401407/0.-Haig-Park-Place-Plan_03-PAGES_FINAL-FORMAT-A18048685.pdf accessed 20 October 2019; Haig Park website is found at https://www.haigparkcbr.com.au/Home accessed 20 October 2019. 22 Transport Canberra and City Services (TCCS) 2018, Have Your Say on City Services for Better Suburbs Statement 2030, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/4215/3722/6646/ Better_Suburbs_Statement_accessible_SEPTEMBER_2018.pdf accessed 20 October 2019. 23 EPSDD 2019, Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City, ACT Government, Canberra, can be found at https://apo.org. au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2019/09/apo-nid259131-1386826.pdf https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0006/1413771/Canberras-Living-Infrastructure-Plan-Summary.pdf accessed 20 October 2019. 24 City Renewal Authority, 2019, City Precinct Renewal Program, ACT Government, Canberra. Found at https://www.act.gov.au/__ data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1384679/City-Renewal-Program-semi-accesible.pdf accessed 30 October 2019. A volunteer group, ACTForBees, was instrumental in driving this initiative.20 Haig Park – unloved for many years – now has its own website, and people are encouraged to join in ‘Haig Park Experiments’.21 The Better Suburbs consultation produced the Better Suburbs Statement 2030 which seeks community involvement in tree-planting and maintenance programs.22 Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City outlines actions such as auditing, valuing, and setting targets of 30% tree canopy by 2045 and 30% permeable surfaces.23 The ACT’s tree canopy target sits in the mid-range with other Australian capital city targets – only Brisbane and Melbourne aspire to 40%.
 The City Renewal Authority assists TCCS with tree-planting programs and has: • set a target of 30% tree cover by 2025 in its Sustainability Strategy • planted 39 advanced trees to fill gaps due to vandalism and damage across Braddon and Civic • successfully advocated that mature deciduous trees should be retained and replanted in Dickson as a demonstration of the viability of such projects; and • promoted planning which responds to the Urban Tree Strategy and the Tree Protection Act 2005.24 84 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report SAFE AND USEFUL LIVES OF TREES Any assessment of the extent, value and viability of tree cover in the ACT has to take into account the biological and ‘safe’ life of Canberra’s tree cover, and the fact that many trees are reaching the end of their ‘useful’ life.25 For example, research suggests that any tree in Belconnen that currently does not have dead branches or other problems in the canopy has a 50% probability of developing them within the next year. This indicator means that half of the currently healthy trees this year will not look healthy next year.26 In addition, dieback is increasing in the ACT’s populations of Blakely’s Red Gum (see section 5.5 Biodiversity) and Red Stringybark dieback has been identified as a problem in the Aranda Bushland.27 The NCA is also considering the issues associated with ageing trees, regeneration, and single species plantings. Two species, Eucalyptus mannifera (Brittle Gum) and Eucalyptus bicostata (Southern Blue Gum) comprise 12% and 11.5% of trees on NCA land respectively. This does not meet industry best practice which suggests that no single species should constitute more than 5–10% of the canopy cover. Where any individual tree species makes up a high proportion of the total tree cover there is an increased risk of significant tree loss where conditions become unsuitable for such species. 25 Personal communication, Associate Professor Cris Brack of the Fenner School of Environment and Society, ANU, 2019. 26 Associate Professor Cris Brack, presentation at the Life and Death in a City of Trees Synthesis Workshop at ANU, 12–13 September 2019. 27 Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE), 2017, Implementation Status Report on ACT Government’s climate change policy, ACT Government, Canberra, 108. Found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0018/1116324/CSE-ISR-Report-Aug2017_FA_AccPDF_c2.pdf accessed 30 October 2019. 28 Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE), 2018, Independent Audit of the Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra. Found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of- the-molonglo-valley-strategic-assessment accessed 30 October 2019. URBAN DEVELOPMENT PRESSURES As Canberra becomes a more compact city with increasing population and moves toward greater urban infill, public space and the urban forest will come under pressure. This is particularly the case for trees and understorey on private residential blocks which are subject to redevelopment. In the Molonglo Valley, 2.4 hectares of public space is available for every 1000 people, compared with 8.6 hectares in older suburbs. House lots are also much smaller: 350 square metres in the Molonglo Valley compared to 650 square metres in older suburbs, which will mean that trees on public green space will be subject to a much greater community need. 28 The OCSE has conducted an independent audit of the impact of development on matters of national environmental significance in both Gungahlin and the Molonglo Valley and made a number of recommendations to the ACT Government. These include the finalisation of the Kama Nature Reserve Buffer Zone, which is intended to provide protection for flora and fauna against edge effects. Apart from the pressures associated with development generally, specific old growth and individual trees have been felled to make way for buildings and infrastructure. Their loss is keenly felt by the community, even when they are ‘repurposed’. Again, the Molonglo Valley is instructive. Large, mature native trees, often remnant trees which makes them even more valuable for biodiversity, are unique landscape features that play a critical role in the quality of the urban forest. These trees are extremely important as a habitat and food resource for wildlife and have high cultural and landscape significance. Scrutiny of repurposed trees for biodiversity value has produced some interesting results. 85 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: MOLONGLO – REPURPOSING TREES FOR BIODIVERSITY 29 Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE), 2018, Independent Audit of the Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra. Found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the- molonglo-valley-strategic-assessment accessed 30 October 2019. 30 This research report is drawn from ANU News, 23/8/2019, ‘Artificial Trees Capture New Bird Species on Candid Camera’, found at https://www.anu.edu.au/news/all-news/artificial-trees-capture-new-bird-species-on-candid-camera-1 accessed 30 October 2019. 31 Associate Professor P. Gibbons, ANU News, 23/8/2019, ‘Artificial Trees Capture New Bird Species on Candid Camera’, found at https://www.anu.edu.au/news/all-news/artificial-trees-capture-new-bird-species-on-candid-camera-1 accessed 30 October 2019. Barrer Hill translocated dead trees. Source: OCSE. Associate Professor Philip Gibbons (Fenner School of Environment and Society, ANU), an expert in the edge effects of development on natural landscapes,29 has collaborated with ACT Parks and Conservation Service and the ANU School of Art and Design, to set up monitoring sites on power poles and translocated dead trees (cut down to make way for development) to observe usage by wildlife. One of the trees translocated to the Barrer Hill site in the Molonglo Valley to make way for development was a 400 year old Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora).30 Birds, bats, reptiles and insects visiting the structures have been captured on videos which are then made available to the public, who are also invited to post their photos on the website (http:// molonglo.life/#!/). Visitors have included wood spiders, ladybirds, microbats, and Crimson and Eastern Rosellas, starlings, Yellow-tailed Black Cockatoos, Galahs, Red Wattlebirds, Willie Wagtails, Red-rumped Parrots, Kookaburras, a Peregrine Falcon, Nankeen Kestrel, Tawny Frogmouth and a range of insects. During the study there was a four-fold increase in bird species at power pole structures, and a seven-fold increase in bird species at the salvaged trees. Dr Gibbons observed that planting juvenile trees would not provide the habitat of the repurposed mature (dead) trees. However, Dr Gibbons reported that 37% of bird species that relied upon mature forests did not use the structures: ‘… we need to preserve as many mature trees as we can, [and we have to] continue to plant more new seedlings for the future … at the end of the day you can’t beat real trees … but they take years to grow. So this is a great option in areas needing regeneration or while you wait for trees to mature.’31 86 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CLIMATE CHANGE PRESSURES AND IMPLICATIONS 32 Clean Air and Urban Landscapes Hub (National Environmental Sciences Programme), 2017, Risks to Australia’s Urban Forest from Climate Change and Urban Heat, University of Melbourne, Melbourne. Found at https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/ resource-files/2017/11/apo-nid136871-1230256.pdf accessed 30 October 2019. 33 Clean Air and Urban Landscapes Hub (National Environmental Sciences Programme), 2017, Risks to Australia’s Urban Forest from Climate Change and Urban Heat, University of Melbourne, Melbourne. Found at https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/ resource-files/2017/11/apo-nid136871-1230256.pdf accessed 30 October 2019. 34 Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) are the GHG concentration trajectories used in the Fifth Assessment Report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In summary, RCP 4.5 scenarios are predicated on modelling which suggests a temperature range increase from 0.9 to 2.6 degrees to the end of the century and RCP 8.5 scenarios suggest a future range (adopting a business as usual approach) in the range of 1.4 to 4.8 degrees. 35 United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2018, Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 °C, https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/ accessed 30 October 2019. Climate change is increasingly recognised as one of the most pressing issues confronting cities. There is growing recognition that increasing temperatures due to urban heat and climate change are a threat to some tree species in our cities.32 Canberra is expected to have a climate like Dubbo by 2090. The population will continue to grow, and our urban forest will continue to mature and age. This will increase the need to: • respond with climate change adaptation plans • design the urban forest with a focus on resilience and flexibility • design water-sensitive landscapes and respond to understorey needs in accordance with landscaping best practice, and • protect, maintain, and manage for senescence and other issues, including drought and pests. The National Environmental Science Program’s Clean Air and Urban Landscape Hub (CAUL) assessed the viability of 356,547 of Canberra’s trees (from a data set of 446,730 trees). In ordinary circumstances the three species at risk are the Common Oak (Quercus robur), the Dutch Elm (Ulmus x hollandica), and the Turkey Oak (Quercus cerris).33 The picture is of greater concern when considered under climate change Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) scenarios. Subject to RCP4.5 (GHG emissions limited, temperatures rising from 0.89°C to 2.6°C and stabilising in 2100) and RCP8.5 (GHG emissions, business as usual, temperatures rising from 1.4°C to 4.8°C),34 CAUL has concluded many more tree species will struggle. CAUL’s complete list of species at risk across Canberra (Table 1) provides an illustration of the extent of climate change concerns for the urban tree canopy. This research has been replicated for 29 Australian cities including Perth, Melbourne, Adelaide, Sydney, Brisbane, and Darwin. In considering the implications of climate change on tree canopy, regard should be given to the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2018 report Global Warming of 1.5°C.35 Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City provides a launching pad for a response, but care needs to be taken to avoid planting species which will not survive, even though they might be of local provenance. 87 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Table 1: Temperature risk to the most common tree species in Canberra. No Species Abundance (%) Number trees Current climate RCP4.5 future RCP8.5 future 1 Unknown 87388 2 Eucalyptus mannifera 16.50% 58813 green green orange 3 Eucalyptus spp. 9.95% 35494 green green yellow 4 Casuarina cunninghamiana 9.89% 35251 green green green 5 Eucalyptus polyanthemos 5.12% 18244 green green yellow 6 Eucalyptus melliodora 5.00% 17814 green green yellow 7 Pinus radiata 3.67% 13090 green yellow orange 8 Fraxinus angustifolia 3.27% 11651 green green orange 9 Pyrus calleryana 2.34% 8339 green green green 10 Quercus palustris 2.27% 8084 green orange orange 11 Eucalyptus blakelyi 2.15% 7656 green green yellow 12 Eucalyptus cinereal 2.12% 7542 green green yellow 13 Eucalyptus sideroxylon 2.09% 7445 green green green 14 Populus alba 1.84% 6549 green yellow orange 15 Ulmus parvifolia 1.63% 5794 green green green 16 Eucalyptus globulus 1.52% 5425 green green green 17 Prunus cerasifera 1.46% 5194 green yellow yellow 18 Eucalyptus nicholii 1.41% 5044 green green yellow 19 Quercus spp. 1.35% 4809 green yellow orange 20 Liquidambar styraciflua 1.17% 4176 green green green 21 Gleditsia triacanthos 1.17% 4166 green green yellow 22 Zelkova serrata 1.02% 3642 green green green 23 Populus spp. 0.99% 3536 green yellow orange 24 Platanus acerifolia 0.94% 3340 green green yellow 25 Ulmus minor 0.93% 3299 green yellow red 26 Pistacia chinensis 0.88% 3139 green green green 27 Quercus lusitanica 0.84% 3010 green green orange 28 Ulmus spp. 0.73% 2601 green yellow orange 29 Platanus orientalis 0.68% 2441 green green green 30 Eucalyptus viminalis 0.65% 2331 green yellow orange 31 Celtis australis 0.64% 2295 green green yellow 32 Eucalyptus bridgesiana 0.59% 2099 green orange red 33 Fraxinus spp. 0.58% 2051 green green orange 34 Cedrus atlantica 0.54% 1941 green orange orange 35 Styphnolobium japonicum 0.53% 1880 green green yellow 36 Pinus spp. 0.53% 1878 green yellow orange 37 Pyrus ussuriensis 0.51% 1836 green green yellow 88 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report No Species Abundance (%) Number trees Current climate RCP4.5 future RCP8.5 future 38 Cupressus spp. 0.46% 1632 green green green 39 Fraxinus velutina 0.43% 1526 green green green 40 Quercus robur 0.43% 1523 yellow orange orange 41 Eucalyptus elata 0.42% 1510 green green orange 42 Ulmus × hollandica 0.40% 1426 yellow orange red 43 Cupressus sempervirens 0.37% 1314 green green green 44 Quercus cerris 0.35% 1243 yellow yellow orange 45 Eucalyptus macrorhyncha 0.34% 1229 green yellow red 46 Populus nigra 0.34% 1212 green yellow yellow 47 Platanus spp. 0.32% 1145 green green yellow 48 Ulmus Americana 0.29% 1021 green yellow yellow 49 Fraxinus Americana 0.28% 1001 green yellow yellow 50 Quercus canariensis 0.28% 992 green green yellow Source: Clean Air and Urban Landscapes Hub (National Environmental Sciences Programme), 2017, Risks to Australia’s Urban Forest from Climate Change and Urban Heat, University of Melbourne. 36 Fenner School of Environment and Society, Australian National University (Associate Professor Cris Brack et al.) 2019, Urban Forest Tree Species Research for the ACT, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1437047/ urban-forest-tree-species-research-for-the-act-consultants-report-2019.pdf, report commissioned by the ACT Government in 2019, accessed on 30 October 2019. Recent research by ANU’s Fenner School of Environment and Society,36 suggests the best trees for planting in the ACT under climate change scenarios include Kurrajong Veregreen (Brachychiton populneus), the River She-oak (Casuarina cunninghamiana) and the Arizon Cypress (Cyress arizonica). However, diversity is a key consideration and different species will be more appropriate for different circumstances. 89 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: URBAN TREES AND HEAT37 37 Meyers, J. et al., 2017, Mapping Surface Urban Heat in Canberra, CSIRO, Canberra. Found at https://www.environment.act.gov. au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1170968/CSIRO-Mapping-Surface-Urban-Heat-In-Canberra.pdf accessed September 2019. Cities, urban areas and industrial developments can create urban heat islands, where temperatures in urban areas are warmer than those in rural areas. During the day buildings, roads and paved surfaces absorb solar radiation and then release the heat slowly at night, which slows the cooling process. For example, in summer the urban areas of Canberra have been found to be 8°C warmer in summer and 6°C warmer in winter than the surrounding rural area. Figure 1: Land surface temperatures for the ACT for 9 February 2017, 10.50 AM. Data for the southern-most tip of the ACT has been excluded owing to cloud cover. 90 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Trees have been shown to reduce surface temperatures effectively with cooler areas recorded during summer where there is greater tree canopy cover. Land surface temperatures for the ACT on 9 February 2017 (10.50 AM) are shown in Figure 1. When comparing the land surface temperatures with the vegetation index (Figure 2) there is a clear correlation between the high land surface temperatures and lack of vegetation, and lower land surface temperatures with greater green vegetation. Figure 2: Vegetation greenness index for the ACT for 9 February 2017, 10.50 AM. Data for the southern-most tip of the ACT has been excluded owing to cloud cover. 91 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report This relationship between tree cover and land surface temperature is also shown in a comparison of land use and percentage of tree cover (Figures 3 and 4, also for 9 February 2017 at 10.50 AM). Industrial was the hottest land use with 37.4°C, this is most likely due to the fact that Industrial areas in Canberra tend to have extensive impervious surfaces (rooftops and paved surfaces) and only 8.5% tree cover. In comparison parks and recreation areas had the lowest temperature (35°C) due to having the highest percentage of tree cover (28.6%). In residential areas, high density residential land use has the highest mean land surface temperature at 37.2°C and only 9% tree cover, compared to the suburban core which was 34.7°C and had 20% tree cover. Whilst the temperature difference appears to be small, this is because measurements were taken in the morning (due to satellite availability). It is highly likely that for afternoon temperatures, the differences between areas with low and high tree cover would be far greater. This could potentially have severe human health implications during hot periods. It is clear that improvements in tree cover are essential to Canberra’s climate change adaptation. 33 34 35 36 37 38 Parks & Recreation Non Urban Community Facilities Residential Commercial Transport & Services Industrial 0 6 12 18 24 30 Parks & Recreation Non Urban Community Facilities Residential Commercial Transport & Services Industrial Mean land surface temperature Mean land surface temperature Percentage tree cover Percentage tree cover Figure 3: A comparison of mean land surface temperature by land use type and percentage of tree cover, 9 February 2017, 10.50 AM. 33 34 35 36 37 38 Suburban Core Suburban Medium Density Residential Urban Residential High Density Residential 0 6 12 18 24 30 Suburban Core Suburban Medium Density Residential Urban Residential High Density Residential Mean land surface temperature Mean land surface temperature Percentage tree cover Percentage tree cover Figure 4: A comparison of mean land surface temperature by residential land use type and percentage of tree cover, 9 February 2017, 10.50 AM. 92 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report THE LIVES OF TREES IN CANBERRA In Canberra trees have an expected useful life of between 50 to 80 years, depending on species and conditions. Associate Professor Cris Brack concludes that the end of a tree’s ‘useful’ or ‘safe’ age occurs when safety and other risks, as well as economic and other costs, start to outweigh the benefits of individual trees. Reflecting these pressures, an average of 516 trees each year is removed under contract in Canberra and approximately 850 trees are removed by TCCS’ in-house maintenance team. Recent expert audits have shown that around 22% of trees planted in Canberra’s suburbs will reach the end of their ‘safe’ or ‘useful’ life and require removal within the next twenty years. Modelling suggests a rate of 1–2% of trees per annum on average will fall into this category, although this rate might increase in drought years and show a reduction in others. This translates to potentially thousands of trees per year. The Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City is intended to assist in establishing a response to this issue. The UN System of Environmental Economic Accounting (SEEA)38 is being considered as a methodology for determining the environmental and economic benefits of Canberra’s tree cover to promote the sort of expenditure which will be necessary to fund this urban forest initiative. This SEEA commitment builds on the i-Tree methodology39 which had been used previously to value an urban forest.40 It also builds on the broader accounts that the OCSE did with the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM), the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), ANU, the UN and the Office of Environmental Heritage (OEH), to examine the benefits of environmental-economic accounts in the SEEA Proof of Concept for the ACT 2017.41 38 Further information can be found at https://seea.un.org/ accessed on 30 October 2019. 39 Further information about i-Tree tools are found at https://www.itreetools.org/ accessed on 30 October 2019. 40 202020 Vision references to the potential uses of i-Tree can be found at https://202020vision.com.au/ accessed on 30 October 2019. 41 OCSE, 2017, Environmental-Economic Accounts for ACT State of Environment Reporting, Proof of Concept, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/publications/environmental-economic-accounts accessed on 30 October 2019. 42 This figure does not include tree plantings associated with estate developments, landscape renewal projects or community programs. Over the next four years (2020–2024), TCCS advises that an additional 17,330 new trees will be planted across Canberra. Planting locations will focus on areas of low urban canopy cover and areas where the canopy target is at risk of decline with the ageing of existing trees. This planting program is being used to offset anticipated tree losses that will occur between 2020 and 2035, when a significant proportion of the trees in the urban forest reach the end of their useful life. Beyond the targeted plantings, TCCS planted an average of 937 trees annually from July 2015 to June 2019 to replace trees that had been removed or where there was space for a new tree to be planted.42 MAINTAINING TREES IN CANBERRA Maintenance activities include watering, formative and ongoing pruning, removal of dead or damaged timber, and risk reduction by rectification of structural defects. Watering during the warmer months (October to April) is the primary maintenance cost for a young tree. Noting the temperature ranges anticipated under climate change scenarios and the number of trees entering the over-mature stage, this maintenance regime will require adjustment. In the 2018–2019 financial year, TCCS watered over 25,000 young trees. Native trees are routinely watered for three years after planting. Exotics are more commonly watered for five years. The cost to maintain trees over the establishment period ranges from approximately $150 to $255 per tree, plus water costs associated with six watering events. 93 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report TREE PROTECTION AND THE TREE REGISTER 43 This forum will be the subject of a report at a later date. This case study was provided by Ashley Eriksmoen, leader of the ANU School of Art and Design Witness Tree Project, supported by Heritage ACT. TCCS administers the Tree Protection Act 2005 and the ACT Tree Register. Applications to remove private trees regulated under the Tree Protection Act 2005 are managed according to the legislated process. The Tree Protection Unit received 2,257 Tree Damaging Activity applications and Development Application submissions in the 2018–2019 financial year. A range of appeal processes are available where applications are not granted. The ACT Tree Register protects trees in the urban area that have exceptional qualities because of their natural and cultural heritage values or their contribution to the urban landscape. The Tree Register currently includes 176 single tree registrations and 35 group registrations. Ten additional trees currently sit on the provisional tree register awaiting full registration. CASE STUDY: REPURPOSING TREES FOR HUMAN USE One inspired Canberra initiative, the ‘Witness Tree Program’, created and organised by the ANU School of Art and Design, funded by an ACT Government heritage grant and supported by the ANU Fenner School of Environment and Society, illustrates both the benefits and the complexities of repurposing unique old growth trees. A synthesis symposium was recently conducted as part of this program – the Life and Death in a City of Trees Synthesis Workshop.43 The forum considered the fate of trees which have reached the end of their ‘useful’ life, and heard from those engaged in forestry, art, crafts, various tiers of government, and the circular economy. International and local contributions reinforced the message that value-adding through repurposing is possible and responsible. The Witness Tree project repurposed important, mature trees which had ‘witnessed the unfolding of history’ while noting some of the difficulties in manufacturing unique specimens. ‘Witness Trees’ felled and milled in 2013 by Gordon Smith (a fine furniture maker from Hall), were air dried until 2015, and then turned in to bespoke products for the ACT Heritage Festival 2016. Some of these trees were eighty years old and included • a Silky Oak (Grevillea robusta) from Hargreaves Crescent, Ainslie and gazetted in 1928. • an Elm (Ulmus procera) from Weston Park, Yarralumla, gazetted in 1928. • a Pin Oak (Que palustris) from Torrens Street, Braddon, gazetted in 1928. • a Himalayan Cedar (Cedrus doedara) from Jardine Street, Kingston, gazetted in 1928. • a Claret Ash (Frazinus oxycarpa) from Hayes Crescent, Griffith, gazetted in 1928. • a London Plane (Plantanus x acerfolia) from Eggleston Crescent, Chifley, gazetted in 1966. 94 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Himalayan Cedar: Katalin Sallai The Witness Bench of Kingston. This Witness Tree was planted as part of Weston’s afforestation program in the 1920s. Himalayan Cedar is the ‘timber of the gods’ and native to Afghanistan, Kashmir and India. It has been used to build temples, and more prosaically, railway cars and lines. Gazetted in 1928, this tree ‘survived the reign of four monarchs and witnessed the royal visit of 1954’. It also witnessed young soldiers and nurses leaving from the Kingston railway station to go to World War I. Himalayan cedars have a life expectancy in other climates of up to 600 years. The outer circle of the bench is intended to represent its potential growth and the inner circle represents its actual growth. Grevillea Robusta (Silky Oak), Ulmus Procera (Elm), Fraxinas Oxycarpa (Claret Ash): Myles Gostelow This ‘barrow to push’ was designed and constructed using techniques from the early 1900s. Elm was used for the tub, Ash for the spokes, the tray was made from Silky Oak. This barrow was crafted as a tribute to Charles Weston. Myles Gostelow wrote: ‘There is every chance that the trees and subsequent timber used in the construction of this barrow would have been planted from stock grown in the [Weston] nursery and be aged up to 96 years old.’ 95 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report THE FUTURE – CANBERRA’S LIVING INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN: COOLING THE CITY 44 OCSE, 2017, Environmental-Economic Accounts for ACT State of Environment Reporting, Proof of Concept, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/publications/environmental-economic-accounts accessed on 30 October 2019. At the time of writing this report Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City had only just been released (September 2019), but this plan reflects the need to respond to a number of issues which have been discussed here: climate change, development pressure, maintenance in the face of an ageing canopy, the need for understorey, water-sensitive design for best biodiversity outcomes, and the ongoing involvement of the community. Targets and a schedule for actions have been set. Recognition of climate change implications and a commitment to water-sensitive urban design filters throughout the whole plan, which encourages an understanding of the holistic nature of urban sustainability planning, promotes adaptation to climate change, and works to build resilience. Action 1 provides for the use of the United Nations System of Environmental Economic Accounts to measure the value of the ecosystem services provided by the urban forest. This reflects the work of OCSE in producing the SEEA Proof of Concept for the ACT.44 There is a critical need for this analysis to assist government to understand the economic benefit of an urban forest and to promote targeted funding. Action 2 sets targets of 30% tree canopy cover and 30% permeable surfaces by 2045; these targets are in line with the ambitions of other comparable cities. Actions 3, 4 and 5 provide for climate-wise guides and assessments, all of which will be useful in assisting the community to understand, act upon, and adapt to the significant climate change challenges ahead. Action 8 introduces the need for a review of the Tree Protection Act 2005, a timely intervention which will allow the community to have a say about the management of the urban forest. In light of the interest in tree matters in the OCSE complaints process, and noting the continuing commentary on decisions such as the mediated outcome in the Manuka Plane Tree case, review of the legislation is timely and should actively involve the public. Action 9 directs TCCS to start the development of an Urban Forest Strategy in 2020, which should deliver biodiversity outcomes. This action item should be used to support and encourage community groups like ACTForBees, SEE-Change, the Canberra Environment Centre, the Conservation Council and Communities@Work to build their capacity to influence government about canopy, but more broadly, biodiversity, and sustainable development. The Strategy will provide an opportunity to consider biodiversity protections and enhancement across the whole urban fabric. Action 12 provides for ‘shadeways’ on bicycle infrastructure. This is a matter which has been raised frequently with the OCSE and is actively supported. Action 13 talks about promoting demonstration projects. The architecture and the arts communities should be actively encouraged to join this conversation. Finally, it is commendable that the Living Infrastructure Plan encourages investigation of private investment opportunities. Developers and businesses have a vested interest in providing infrastructure that meets twenty-first century needs and governments have a responsibility to ensure that they do so. 96 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 97 04 Urban Trees in the ACT – nature in the city.
05 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 05 INDICATORS, CONDITION AND TRENDS Section Contents 5.1 Climate change 100 5.2 Human settlements 122 5.3 Air 168 5.4 Land 184 5.5 Biodiversity 204 5.6 Water 274 5.7 Fire 314 98 © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report This chapter assesses the current condition and trends for a range of natural and sustainability issues in the ACT. Assessments are based on 26 indicators across 7 themes selected to address specific environmental issues. These indicators provide evidence on both the status of issues and the effectiveness of environmental management policies and activities. For each indicator, a graded assessment is provided using a dashboard display containing snapshots of key information including condition, trend and data quality. The dashboards should be read in conjunction with the indicator content provided in each section. The graded assessment criteria are provided below. Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Assessment criteria used for indicator dashboards1 1 Adapted from Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, 2013, Victoria: State of the Environment, The State of Victoria, Melbourne. Data availability, quality and comprehensiveness is a key limitation for indicator assessments. The data quality ratings provided in the indicator dashboards provide a measure of the level of confidence in the condition and trend assessments reported. If adequate high-quality data was available, confidence in the assessment is high. If data was limited, confidence is low. Where data was insufficient to enable an assessment, an unknown rating is applied. Data availability issues are discussed for each theme reported, highlighting where more information is required to improve environmental knowledge and the capacity to respond to environmental challenges. Where relevant, the influence of significant climate and other events on data trends are discussed for each indicator. It is important to note that such influences can have a significant impact on environmental condition regardless of management effectiveness. National Environment Protection Measures (NEPM) The Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993 requires every State of the Environment report to include an assessment of the ACT’s compliance with relevant NEPMs. The NEPMs assessed in this report are: • Movement of Controlled Waste (see section 5.2 Human settlements) • Used Packaging Materials (see section 5.2 Human settlements) • Ambient Air Quality (see section 5.3 Air) • National Pollutant Inventory (see section 5.3 Air) • Assessment of Site Contamination (see section 5.4 Land). 99 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
5.1 CLIMATE CHANGE 100 05 Indicators, condition and trends © Ryan Colley.
Section contents Indicator assessment 103 Key actions 104 Main findings 104 Introduction 105 Impacts of climate change on the ACT 105 Data trends 106 Indicator CC1: Climate trends 106 Indicator CC2: Impacts of climate change 112 Indicator CC3: Greenhouse gas emissions 116 Data gaps 121 101 5.1 Climate change.
Climate change in the ACT ACT’s climate trends increase in mean maximum temperatures since 1926 1.5ºC most recent years have been drier than average hot days have doubled since 1950 x2 was the warmest year on record for mean minimum temperatures 2016 increase in mean minimum temperatures since 1926 2ºC was the warmest year on record for daytime temperatures 2018 days above 40°C in January 2019 5 decrease in rainfall, particularly for spring and winter Projected climate trends more frequent and prolonged drought increased fire danger more frequent and severe storms higher average temperatures and more hot days reduced inflows to water storages Observed impacts of climate change increase in tree dieback and mortality of urban trees increase in cyanobacterial blooms in Canberra’s lakes occurrence of dust storms increase in fire danger decrease in total emissions between 2012–13 and 2017–18 ACT’s Greenhouse gas emissions 17% decrease in per capita greenhouse gas emissions between 2012–13 and 2017–18 24% of total emissions in 2020 will be from transport 62% increase in transport emissions between 2012–13 and 2017–18 13% projected emissions from electricity generation by 2020 0% ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 102 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality CC1: Climate trends Climate change is having a significant impact on the ACT, with clear evidence of a warming climate and increased occurrence of heat days. Rainfall is variable, but most recent years have been drier than average. Projections suggest a worsening climate with hotter temperatures and decreased rainfall. Poor     High CC2: Impacts of climate change Climate is impacting on the ACT’s community, economy and the natural environment. Observed changes include reduced inflows to water storages, increased tree mortality, greater fire danger, and more algal blooms in Canberra’s lakes. Poor     Moderate CC3: Greenhouse gas emissions By 2020, emissions from electricity generation will fall to zero and the ACT will meet the legislated target for total emissions. Transport will contribute over 60% of ACT’s emissions after 2020 and will become the main focus for future reductions. However, transport emissions increased by 13% between 2012–13 and 2017–18 and will represent a significant challenge in the future. The phasing out of natural gas will also be important. Per capita greenhouse gas emissions were just over 8 tonnes in 2017–18, a decrease of around 24% from 2012–13. Good     High Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 103 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: investigate and implement measures to reduce transport emissions. ACTION 2: increase living infrastructure to mitigate the impacts of climate change in urban areas. ACTION 3: improve knowledge of the impacts of climate change across urban and natural environments to inform strategies on climate adaptation and resilience. ACTION 4: assess and monitor carbon stocks and investigate opportunities to increase carbon sequestration in natural ecosystems and urban environments. Main findings Climate trends There is clear evidence of a warming climate trend in the ACT. Annual mean maximum temperatures have risen by over 1.5 °C since records began in 1926. Minimum temperatures have warmed the most, having risen by around 2 °C since records began in 1926, with 2016 the warmest year on record for mean minimum temperatures. Since 2013, every year has been among the eleven warmest years on record for daytime temperatures and 2018 was the warmest year on record for daytime temperatures in the ACT. The number of hot days has doubled since 1950, with 5 days above 40°C in January 2019, and an increase of 4 days per year for temperatures above 35 °C. Rain is variable in the ACT region, with no long-term trend, although recent years have been drier than average with the exception of 2016. Projected climate trends Regional climate modelling suggests the following projections: reduced rainfall, particularly for spring and winter rainfall; more frequent and prolonged drought; average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons; more frequent and severe storms with flash flooding, violent winds, and thunderstorms; and harsher fire-weather climate. Impacts of climate change There are significant climate risks to ACT’s community, economy and the natural environment. Reduced inflows to water storages, with all but 2 years between 2001–02 and 2018–19 below the long-term average. Increase in tree dieback and mortality of urban trees. Increase in the average and maximum Fire Danger Index and an increase in the number of days with a very high Fire Danger Rating. Occurrence of dust storms due to higher temperatures and reduced rainfall. Increase in cyanobacterial blooms in Canberra’s lakes. Greenhouse gas emissions In 2017–18, ACT’s total greenhouse gas emissions were 3,368 thousand tonnes of CO2-e (carbon dioxide equivalent). Total emissions decreased by 17% between 2012–13 and 2017–18 due to the growth in renewable electricity generation. By 2020, emissions from electricity generation will fall to zero. With the elimination of electricity emissions, total emissions are projected to decrease to around 1,918 thousand tonnes of CO2-e, meeting the legislated 2020 target. Per capita annual greenhouse gas emissions were just over 8 tonnes in 2017–18, a decrease of around 24% from 2012–13 and of 29% compared to 1989–90 levels. Between 2012–13 and 2017–18, the electricity generation and transport sectors were the dominant source of greenhouse gas emissions in the ACT. Between 2012–13 and 2017–18 transport emissions increased by 13%; this growth, combined with the decrease in electricity emissions, saw transport contributions rise from 25% to 34% of total emissions. The stationary gas sector contributed 11% of total emissions in 2017–18 and industrial processes 8%. As the electricity sector moves towards zero emissions by 2020, transport will contribute 62% of total emissions, nearly double its 2017–18 proportional contribution. Stationary gas and waste will also double in contribution. Between 2012–13 and 2017–18, greenhouse gas emissions from diesel fuel nearly doubled; as a result, the diesel contribution to total transport emissions rose from 23% to 34% over the same period. Transport and the phasing out of natural gas will become the main focus for future reductions of greenhouse emissions in the ACT. 104 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION 1 Schirmer, J. and B. Yabsley, 2018, Living Well with a Changing Climate: Findings of the 2018 ACT Longitudinal Survey on Climate Change, University of Canberra. 2 Xiang J. et al., 2017, The Economic Burden of Occupational Heat Illnesses in Adelaide, South Australia, 2001–2015, Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 74:A37. 3 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD), 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate- Change-Strategy–2019–2025.pdf/_recache This section provides an assessment of climate change in the ACT including current and projected trends in temperature and rainfall, the impacts of climate change on the human and natural environments, and trends in the ACT’s greenhouse gas emissions. The following indicators are assessed: • CC1: Climate trends • CC2: Impacts of climate change • CC3: Greenhouse gas emissions Climate change is discussed throughout Chapter 5 Indicators, Condition and Trends of this report. Information on the impacts of current and future climate change on specific aspects of the environment can be found in each relevant section. Climate change is the most significant environmental challenge facing governments and communities around the world. In recognition of the need for urgent action, the ACT Government declared a state of climate emergency in May 2019. Climate change is caused by increases in the amounts of greenhouse gases and aerosols in the Earth’s atmosphere. The majority of greenhouse gases come from the burning of fossil fuels, which release carbon dioxide gas to the atmosphere. Climate change is a global challenge with all greenhouse gas emissions, regardless of source and location, contributing to the total atmospheric concentrations which drive local climatic conditions. This means that greenhouse gas emissions from the ACT have an impact on the global environment, not just the local region. Greenhouse gas emissions are exacerbated by population growth and a range of human activities, including those that drive energy and resource demand and land clearing, which reduce the uptake of carbon dioxide. Consequently, government and community actions are fundamental to reducing emissions including minimising vehicle use, cutting back the consumption of goods, choosing products that are better for the environment, and improving recycling and reuse. Whilst many climate change impacts are inevitable given the existing levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, it is vital to reduce emissions to minimise the severity of climate change for the generations to come. The future impacts of climate change will depend on the degree to which we can mitigate greenhouse gas emissions today. Impacts of climate change on the ACT Climate change has significant natural, social and economic repercussions for the ACT driven by increased temperatures, decreased rainfall, and the greater risk of extreme weather events and fire. These have severe consequences for ecosystem health and biodiversity, ecosystem services, and human health and wellbeing. Recent research has found that one-third of the Canberra community have low or very low resilience to climate change and are highly vulnerable to the likely negative impacts. 1 Resilience was generally linked to income levels with low-income community members being the most vulnerable. This was particularly the case for heat where 36% of people live in homes that perform poorly in heatwaves. The study also found that nearly 40% of Canberrans have low resilience to extreme weather events due to lack of preparedness. Climate change has also been shown to have a significant impact on medical costs and the economy. A study of the Adelaide community’s response to hot weather found that for every degree above the threshold of 33ºC, medical costs increased by over 40% and lost work days by nearly 75%.2 Advice from the international scientific community is that if we are to avoid the most catastrophic effects of climate change, the increase in average global temperature must not exceed 2 °C above pre-industrial levels.3 Beyond 2 °C warming there is a risk that the climate system will pass an irreversible tipping point, beyond which the task of stabilising global warming becomes impossible. This would mean an increasingly extreme and unpredictable global climate. Climate change is a significant challenge that will require the ACT Government and community to adapt to a changing environment and undertake preventative actions to build resilience and minimise impacts on the natural and urban environments. 105 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA TRENDS 4 United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Pachauri, R.K. et al., eds, 2014, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC, Geneva, found at https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/05/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full_wcover.pdf 5 Bureau Of Meteorology, 2018, State of the Climate 2018, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at http://www.bom.gov.au/ state-of-the-climate/ Indicator CC1: Climate trends The ACT’s climate is determined by atmospheric conditions and sea-surface temperatures. The main drivers of natural climate variability include (but are not limited to) the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (including La Niña cycles), the Indian Ocean Dipole, and the Southern Annular Mode which influence climate across south-eastern Australia. Changes in the frequency and duration of these drivers cause year-to-year variations in temperature and rainfall. This natural climate variability is now significantly influenced by human-induced climate change. Evidence of global and regional warming caused by greenhouse gas emissions is incontrovertible.4 5 The data presented in this section shows the impact of climate change on the ACT region. Eastern Grey Kangaroos. Source: Ryan Colley. 106 05 Indicators, condition and trends © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report EXPERT COMMENTARY THE STATE OF CANBERRA’S CLIMATE Dr Sophie Lewis, Senior Lecturer, School of Science at the University of NSW, Canberra. Dr Lewis is the 2019 ACT Scientist of the Year and is currently serving as a lead author on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) sixth assessment report. 6 IPCC, Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., eds, 2018, Special Report:Global Warming of 1.5 °C. IPCC, Geneva: 32, found at https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2018/07/SR15_SPM_version_stand_alone_LR.pdf. 7 Bureau Of Meteorology, 2018, State of the Climate 2018, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at http://www.bom.gov.au/state-of-the-climate/ 8 Bureau Of Meteorology, 14 March 2019, Special Climate Statement 68 – Widespread Heatwaves during December 2018 and January 2019, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs68.pdf 9 Perkins-Kirkpatrick, S. E. et al, 2016, Natural Hazards in Australia: Heatwaves, Climate Change, 139:101–114, doi:10.1007/ s10584–016–1650–0. 10 Steffen, W. et al., 2014, Heatwaves: Hotter, Longer, More Often, Climate Council of Australia Ltd, found at https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/9901f6614a2cac7b2b888f55b4dff9cc.pdf A recent report by the IPCC estimates humans have already caused approximately 1 °C of global warming because of increased greenhouse gas emissions.6 This warming has already affected our ecosystems and biodiversity, human health and livelihoods in many regions, raised sea levels, and changed the intensity and frequency of heatwaves, droughts and floods. The impacts of global warming are being felt in the ACT region with annual average temperatures increasing (Figure 1). Extreme events are already becoming more frequent in Australia and the ACT because of climate change.7 In January 2019, Canberra experienced a total of 5 days above 40 °C.8 Since 2007, this 40 °C threshold has been reached 16 times, but had not occurred once in the 25-year period between 1973 and 1998. Figure 1: Canberra’s climate stripes, 1910 to 2018. Each stripe represents the annual average ACT/NSW temperatures. The coolest temperatures are shown in dark blue, the hottest are dark red. Further information is available at https://showyourstripes.info. The impact of global warming on our weather and climate extremes is clearest for changes in temperatures.9 Long-term data shows that there has been a doubling in the number of hot days in Canberra since 1950 (Figure 2).10 The frequency and duration of heatwaves has also increased. In addition, there have been 50% more monthly heat records broken in NSW and ACT compared to cold records. Climate change is also affecting other important weather extremes such as the timing and severity of frost events, heavy rain and wind storms. These extreme events have potentially large repercussions for people and the environment. 107 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 1922 1918 1914 Number of days 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 1922 1918 1914 Figure 2: Annual number of hot days in Canberra (maximum temperature above the long-term 99th percentile value), 1914 to 2018. Data sourced from: Bureau of Meteorology, Canberra Airport site 11 Bureau Of Meteorology, 1 November 2018, Special Climate Statement 66 – An Abnormally Dry Period in Eastern Australia, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs66.pdf 12 Bureau Of Meteorology, 12 December 2018, Special Climate Statement 67 – An Extreme Heatwave on the Tropical Queensland Coast, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs67.pdf 13 Dowdy, A.J., 2018, Climatological Variability of Fire Weather in Australia, Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 57: 221–234. 14 Herold, N. et al., 2018, Australian Climate Extremes in the 21st Century According to a Regional Climate Model Ensemble: Implications for Health and Agriculture, Weather Climate Extremes, 20: 54–68. 15 Clarke, H. et al., 2013, Changes in Australian Fire Weather between 1973 and 2010, International Journal of Climatology, 944: 931–944. 16 Australia has the highest per capita carbon dioxide emissions of all countries within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 17 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov. au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate-Change-Strategy–2019–2025.pdf/_recache Multiple climate extremes can also occur at the same time, leading to impacts much greater than for individual extremes. We experienced this compound extreme effect in 2018, when extreme heat combined with an extended period of low rainfall left 100% of NSW in declared drought conditions.11 When extreme heat occurs with low rainfall, such as in Queensland in November 2018, bushfire risks can also increase.12 Measures of annual fire danger have increased substantially for Canberra.13 Climate change is a global-scale problem but it is already affecting all Canberrans – and it will continue to do so for decades to come. At current rates, global warming is likely to reach 1.5 °C between 2030 and 2052, and greenhouse gas emissions are projected to result in over 3 °C of global warming this century. Such an increase will result in significant climate risks to people, the economy and the natural environment. In Canberra, these trends translate into an increase in the frequency, severity and duration of heatwaves, a greater number of heat-related deaths and challenges for local agriculture.14 Climate models also project a decrease in overall rainfall, particularly during spring, together with greater fire risks.15 While Australia’s per capita greenhouse gas emissions remain high compared to other developed countries, the ACT has demonstrated it is a global leader in emissions reduction.16 By setting ambitious targets to achieve zero net greenhouse gas emissions by 2045, Canberra has been rated amongst leading jurisdictions in climate policy in the world.17 Policies include a 100% renewable electricity target by 2020, transition to zero emissions from vehicles, and a climate adaptation strategy. This strategy includes green (or living) infrastructure as a key tool to reduce the critical impacts of future climate change, such as the role of urban trees in Canberra to reduce the urban heat island effect on hot days (Figure 3). 05 Indicators, condition and trends 108.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 34° 31.5° 30° 30° 30° 30.5° 31.5° RURAL CBD INDUSTRIAL URBAN RESIDENTIAL PARK SUBURBAN RURAL Figure 3: Urban heat island effect comparing temperatures across different land use and vegetation cover (late afternoon temperature). Source: Adapted from Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2017, Implementation Status Report on ACT Government’s Climate Change Policy, ACT Government, Canberra. Climate change remains a complex and enduring global problem, with significant impacts at the local level. Figure 4 shows the possible climate warming a child born in Canberra today will experience during their lifetime. It is clear that climate change affects everyone alive today and will do so for many generations to come. Addressing the challenges of climate change requires all of Canberra to continue acting together as global leaders in mitigating and adapting to climate challenge. Year 1900 1950 2000 2050 Global land surface temperatures (compared to 1961-1990) -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Current GHG emissions scenario Low GHG emissions scenario Observations 2019 Possible warming for a Canberra child born today Figure 4: Projections of future warming under different emissions scenarios that a child born in Canberra today will experience during their lifetime. Source: Lewis, S.C. et al., 2017, Defining a New Normal for Extremes in a Warming World, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 98(6): 1139–1151. 109 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Observed surface temperature 18 Based on Bureau of Meteorology observations at Canberra Airport. The ACT’s annual mean maximum temperatures have risen by over 1.5 °C since records began in 1926 (Figure 5).18 The frequency and severity of hot temperatures have also increased (see Figure 2). Since 2013, every year has been among the eleven warmest years on record for daytime temperatures and 2018 was the warmest year on record for daytime temperatures in the ACT. In the ACT, minimum temperatures have warmed the most, with annual mean minimum temperatures having risen by around 2 °C since records began in 1926 (Figure 6). Recent warm years include 2016 which was the warmest year on record for mean minimum temperatures and 2018 which was the tenth warmest year on record. Other annual temperature trends for the ACT include: • an increase of 4 days per year for temperatures above 35 °C • a decrease of 20 days per year for temperatures below 10 °C • an increase of 20 nights per year for temperatures above 15 °C • a decrease of 25 nights per year for temperatures below 0 °C • autumn mean maximum temperatures have risen by just over 1.5 °C since 1926 • the warmest daytime temperatures for autumn were recorded in 2016, with 2018 the second warmest • autumn mean minimum temperatures have risen by around 1 °C since 1926 • spring mean maximum temperatures have risen by over 1.5 °C since 1926, and • spring mean minimum temperatures have risen by over 2 °C since 1926. These results demonstrate a clear warming climate trend in the ACT. The impacts of this warming are discussed in Indicator CC2: Impacts of climate change. 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 Mean maximum temperature anomaly (°C) Temperature 11-year moving average 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 Figure 5: ACT mean maximum temperature anomaly (as calculated from the 1961 to 1990 average), 1926 to 2018. Data sourced from: Bureau of Meteorology, Canberra Airport site. 110 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 Mean minimum temperature anomaly (°C) Temperature 11-year moving average 2018 2014 2010 2006 2002 1998 1994 1990 1986 1982 1978 1974 1970 1966 1962 1958 1954 1950 1946 1942 1938 1934 1930 1926 Figure 6: ACT mean minimum temperature anomaly (as calculated from the 1961 to 1990 average), 1926 to 2018. Data sourced from: Bureau of Meteorology, Canberra Airport site. Observed rainfall 19 Based on Bureau of Meteorology observations at Canberra Airport. There is considerable year-to-year and decadal variability in annual rainfall averaged over the ACT region, with no long-term trend (Figure 7).19 Over the last two decades, the Millennium Drought drove drier-than-average conditions across the ACT from 2000–2009, before being broken by the two La Niña events of 2010–2011 and 2011–2012. Recent years have been drier than average, except for 2016 which had a strong negative Indian Ocean Dipole in that year which typically results in wetter than average conditions over south-eastern Australia. 2015 2010 2005 2000 1995 1990 1985 1980 1975 1970 1965 1960 1955 1950 1945 1940 1935 1930 1925 1920 1915 1910 1905 1900 -500 -400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 400 500 2015 2010 2005 2000 1995 1990 1985 1980 1975 1970 1965 1960 1955 1950 1945 1940 1935 1930 1925 1920 1915 1910 1905 1900 Mean rainfall anomaly (mm) Anomaly 11-year moving average 2015 2010 2005 2000 1995 1990 1985 1980 1975 1970 1965 1960 1955 1950 1945 1940 1935 1930 1925 1920 1915 1910 1905 1900 Figure 7: ACT annual rainfall anomaly (as calculated from the 1961 to 1990 average), 1900 to 2018. Data sourced from: Bureau of Meteorology, Canberra Airport site. 111 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Projected climate trends 20 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov. au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate-Change-Strategy–2019–2025.pdf/_recache 21 Webb, L.B. and K. Hennessy, 2015, Projections for Selected Australian Cities, CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Australia, found at https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.1.6/cms_page_media/176/CCIA_Australian_cities_1.pdf 22 Watts, M.A. et.al., 2018, The 2018 Report of the Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change: Shaping the Health of Nations for Centuries to Come, The Lancet, 392(10163): 2479–2514. Regional climate modelling has identified the most significant effects of climate change on the ACT.20 21 These projections are dependent on the level of global greenhouse gas emissions. Projected impacts include: • reduced rainfall, particularly for spring and winter rainfall, with more frequent and prolonged drought • summer and autumn rainfall may remain unchanged • extreme daily rainfall intensity is projected to increase • average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons • increased extreme temperatures with up to an additional 5 hot days per year by 2030 and 20 more per year by 2070 • temperature increases will mainly be in spring and summer, although the number of hot days will also extend into autumn • hotter temperatures (day and night), longer and more frequent heatwaves • harsher fire-weather climate in the future, • more frequent and severe storms over a longer summer season, with flash flooding, violent winds and thunderstorms • fewer frosts, and • increased evapotranspiration. These projected changes will significantly increase climate pressures on the natural and urban environment. Indicator CC2: Impacts of climate change This section assesses the current impacts of climate change on natural ecosystems, biodiversity, the urban environment, and human health and wellbeing. Attributing environmental changes to climate change alone is difficult due to the range of factors that affect the environment. However, data used in this report suggest the following impacts from climate change: • reductions in rainfall have led to a long-term trend in reduced inflows to water storages, with all but two years below the long-term average between 2001–02 and 2018–19. The total inflows during 2018–19 were the lowest since records began in 1912 (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Water resources). • climate change is causing tree dieback (see section 5.5 Biodiversity – Native vegetation extent and condition). • increased mortality of urban trees (see Chapter 4: Urban trees in the ACT – nature in the city). • higher temperatures have led to an increase in the average and maximum Fire Danger Index and an increase in the number of days with a very high Fire Danger Rating (see section 5.7 Fire). • the occurrence of dust storms due to higher temperatures and reduced rainfall are affecting air quality (see section 5.3 Air). • fuel reduction burns undertaken to manage increasing fire danger is also having an impact on air quality (see section 5.3 Air). • increase in cyanobacterial blooms in Canberra’s lakes, reducing amenity and recreational activities (see section 5.6 Water – Water quality). There will be many other impacts which are not captured by data used in this report. This is particularly the case for subtle changes that occur over long periods. For example, it is widely accepted that climate change is having a significant impact on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and the biodiversity they support. The repercussions of climate change on human health and wellbeing are also well documented.22 It is also difficult to determine climate change impacts at the local level, particularly for the natural environment. This is because the severity of changes depends on a range of factors including landscape types, elevation, and the sensitivity and resilience of ecosystems. This means that the implications of climate change will differ across the ACT with some areas and ecosystem types more affected than others. Despite this, the broad impacts that climate change has on the ACT region are well known and are shown in the following figures. 112 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report LEGEND Impacts of climate change on the urban environment Heatwaves Bushfires Higher Temperatures Severe Storms Drought Damage to buildings and infrastructure. Increased occurrence of poor air quality from fires and dust storms. Increase in heat related illness and hospital admissions. Increased number of work days lost due to extreme temperatures. Flooding of urban environments. Impacts on water quality and increased water treatment costs. Loss of urban trees Restricted recreational opportunities due to hot days. Figure 8: Impacts of climate change on human health and the urban environment. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Notes: Adapted from, Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, 2012, Foundation Paper One: Climate Change Victoria: the Science, Our People, and Our State of Play, Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, Melbourne. 113 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report LEGEND Impacts of climate change on biodiversity Heatwaves Bushfires Higher Temperatures Severe Storms Drought Changes in the distribution and abundance of species, with possible local extinctions. Degraded condition, or loss of groundwater dependant ecosystems. Declines in water quality. Decline in wetland and riparian condition from reduced inundation of wetlands and floodplains. Less frequent successful breeding of water birds and other riverine animals. Loss of alpine and mountainous ecosystems. Degraded condition and loss of fire and drought sensitive habitats. Decreased opportunities for migration and changes to the phenology of species. Extended distribution and greater impacts of pest species. Loss of vegetation decreasing soil health and increasing erosion. Loss of native species sensitive to increased water temperature and reduced river flows. Figure 9: Impacts of climate change on biodiversity and ecosystem health. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Notes: Adapted from, Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, 2012, Foundation Paper One: Climate Change Victoria: the Science, Our People, and Our State of Play, Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, Melbourne. 114 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report LEGEND Impacts of climate change on primary production Heatwaves Bushfires Higher Temperatures Severe Storms Drought Increases in pests and disease reducing yields and raising management costs. Loss of ground cover increasing erosion and dust storms. Loss of property, livestock, crops, and pine plantations due to more frequent bushfires. Decreased soil health limiting plant growth and productivity. Reduction in livestock production quality. Reduction in water resources available for agriculture. Relocation of industries. Reduction in crop yields and timber production. Reduced pasture growth limiting grazing opportunity. Figure 10: Impacts of climate change on primary production. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Notes: Adapted from, Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, 2012, Foundation Paper One: Climate Change Victoria: the Science, Our People, and Our State of Play, Commissioner for Environmental Sustainability, Melbourne. 115 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator CC3: Greenhouse gas emissions 23 The 2020 target is consistent with the IPCC’s recommendations and the most ambitious target in Australia. Greenhouse gas emissions from human activity have increased since the pre-industrial era, mainly through the combustion of fossil fuels and widespread land clearing, with emissions now higher than ever. This has led to atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide that are unprecedented in at least the past 800,000 years. The high atmospheric concentrations of these gases have been the dominant cause of the observed changes to climate conditions since the mid–20th century. Global efforts through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, including the Paris Agreement, aim to keep the global average temperature increase to well below 2 °C and to pursue efforts to keep warming to below 1.5 °C. Achieving this target will require a significant cut in global greenhouse gas emissions. This is dependent on both regional and local actions to reduce emissions. Whilst the ACT’s emissions are only a fraction of that produced globally, the effect of cumulative reductions from local actions across the world will make substantial contributions to minimising the severity of climate change in the future. The ACT Government has legislated greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets under the Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010. The legislated targets are for percentage reductions from 1990 levels and include: • 40% reduction by 202023 • 50% to 60% reduction by 2025 • 65% to 75% reduction by 2030 • 90% to 95% reduction by 2040, and • net zero emissions by 2045. Greenhouse gas types and sources The majority of greenhouse gas emissions come from energy, transport and industry. Those emitted by human activities and measured in the ACT are: • carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels (coal, natural gas and oil), solid waste, trees and wood products, and also as a result of certain chemical reactions (such as the manufacture of cement). • methane emitted during the production and transport of coal, natural gas and oil, livestock and other agricultural practices, and from organic waste decay in municipal solid-waste landfills. • nitrous oxide from the combustion of fossil fuels and solid waste, and also from agricultural and industrial activities, and • fluorinated gases, including hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride and nitrogen trifluoride, which are synthetic gases that are emitted from a variety of industrial processes. The combined effect of all greenhouse gases is expressed as the amount of warming that would be caused by an equivalent amount of carbon dioxide (CO2-e). It is important to note that each greenhouse gas has a different warming effect on the atmosphere. For example, 1 tonne of methane is expressed as 21 tonnes of CO2-e because over the span of 100 years methane will trap 21 times more heat than carbon dioxide. This means that small amounts of some gasses have a potent effect on our climate. 116 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Trends in the ACT’s greenhouse gas emissions Total emissions In 2017–18, the ACT’s total greenhouse gas emissions were 3,368 thousand tonnes of CO2-e (Figure 11). This was a 17% decrease on 2012–13 levels, but 5% higher than the 1989–90 levels that are used as the basis for the ACT’s emission reduction targets. Decreases in total emissions are the result of the growth in the ACT’s total renewable electricity generation, increasing from 20% of electricity supply in 2015–16 to nearly 50% in 2017–18 (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Energy). By 2020, ACT’s renewable electricity is forecast to meet 100% of demand; as a result, greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation will fall to zero. With the elimination of electricity emissions, the ACT’s total emissions are projected to decrease to around 1,918 thousand tonnes of CO2-e. This means that total greenhouse gas emissions for the ACT are expected to meet the legislated 2020 target – a 40% reduction on 1990 levels. Projected 2019–20 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 Projected 2019–20 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 Emissions thousand tonnes CO2-e Total emissions 2020 target Figure 11: Total ACT greenhouse gas emissions (CO2-e) 2012–13 to 2017–18 and projected emissions 2019–20. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Note: Includes net CO2-e from land use, land-use change and forestry Per capita emissions The annual per capita greenhouse gas emissions for the ACT was just over 8 tonnes in 2017–18 (Figure 12). Per capita emissions decreased by around 24% between 2012–13 and 2017–18, and by 29% compared to 1989–90 levels. This decrease has been important to offset annual population growth in the ACT (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Population). Per capita emissions will drop significantly with the projected elimination of electricity emissions by 2020. However, beyond 2020 further decreases in per capita emissions will depend on reductions in other sectors such as transport (see Emissions by source below) The Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010 introduced a legislated requirement for the ACT’s per capita emissions to peak in 2013 (compared to 1990 levels). This target has been met and per capita emissions have decreased since 2012–13. 117 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 Per capita emissions tonnes CO2-e Emissions per capita 1989–90 emissions per capita Figure 12: ACT annual per capita greenhouse gas emissions (CO2-e) 2012–13 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Note: Includes net CO2-e from land use, land-use change and forestry Emissions by source Between 2012–13 and 2017–18, the electricity generation and transport sectors were the dominant source of greenhouse gas emissions in the ACT (Figure 13). Electricity accounted for 57% (2,295 thousand tonnes CO2-e) of total emissions in 2012–13, decreasing to 44% (1,468 thousand tonnes CO2-e) in 2017–18 as the share of renewable energy increased. With the ACT’s renewable electricity forecast to meet 100% of demand, the electricity sector will not contribute to the ACT’s emissions after 2020. Further reductions in emissions beyond 2020 will therefore focus on other sectors such as transport, industry, gas and waste. 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 Projected 2019-20 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 Electricity Emissions thousand tonnes CO2-e Transport Stationary gas Industrial processes Waste Agriculture and land use Figure 13: ACT greenhouse gas emissions (CO2-e) by source, 2012–13 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Agriculture and land use includes net CO2-e from land use, land-use change and forestry 118 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report PROJECTED CHANGES IN EMISSION SOURCES Transport and natural gas will account for a larger portion of the ACT’s carbon footprint as the electricity sector moves towards zero emissions by 2020. Between 2017–18 and 2020, electricity will have declined to 0% of the ACT’s total emissions, while transport will account for 62% (Figure 14). Stationary gas and waste will also double in contribution to annual emissions. Transport and the phasing out of natural gas will become the main focus for future reductions of greenhouse gas emissions in the ACT.24 Industrial processes (11%) Waste (4%) Agriculture and land use (1%) Stationary gas (22%) Industrial processes (8%) Waste (2%) Other (1%) Agriculture and land use (<1%) Stationary gas (11%) Electricity (44%) Transport (34%) Transport (62%) 2017–18 3,368kt 2019–20 1,918kt projected emissions Figure 14: Total and sector greenhouse gas emissions in the ACT for 2017–18 and projected emissions for 2019–20. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Note: Total includes net CO2-e from land use, land-use change and forestry 24 EPSDD, 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov. au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate-Change-Strategy–2019–2025.pdf/_recache 119 5.1 Climate change.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Changes in the emissions of non-electricity sectors are shown in Figure 15. Unlike the electricity sector, transport emissions are growing, both in terms of actual emissions and their proportional contribution to total emissions. Between 2012–13 and 2017–18, transport emissions increased from 1,017 thousand tonnes CO2-e to 1,147 thousand tonnes, an increase of 13%. This growth, combined with the decrease in electricity emissions, led to transport contributions increasing from 25% to 34% of total emissions in the ACT. This proportion is projected to increase to 62% in 2020. 25 The fluctuating trend is most likely related to changes in annual gas usage due to weather conditions. 26 Passenger vehicles account for 84% of vehicles and 82% of vehicle kilometres travelled in the ACT. Light commercial vehicles, which have a substantial proportion of diesel-powered engines, account for 10% of vehicles and 13% of kilometres travelled (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Transport). 27 Transport & Environment, 2018, CO2 Emissions from Cars: The Facts, European Federation for Transport and Environment AISBL, Brussels, found at https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/2018_04_CO2_emissions_cars_The_ facts_report_final_0_0.pdf 28 Morton, A., 2 November 2019, ‘Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Diesel Vehicles Cancelled Out Cuts from Renewable Energy’, The Guardian, found at https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/nov/02/greenhouse-gas-emissions-from-diesel-vehicles- cancelled-out-cuts-from-renewable-energy, accessed November 2019. The stationary gas sector contributed 11% of total emissions in 2017–18, with annual emissions fluctuating from year to year and no overall trend evident.25 Industrial processes only contributed around 8% of total ACT emissions in 2017–18; however, emissions from this sector have increased by 31% since 2012–13. The waste sector contributed around 2% of total emissions in 2017–18, and is also highly variable due to the annual variation in waste produced (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Waste). ACT’s agriculture sector contributed less than 1% of total emissions in 2017–18. 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 Emissions thousand tonnes CO2-e Transport Stationary gas Industrial processes Waste Agriculture and land use Figure 15: Main non-electricity sector sources of greenhouse gas emissions (CO2-e) in the ACT, 2012–13 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Transport emissions and fuel type With transport set to contribute 62% of total emissions by 2020, the current growth in ACT’s transport emissions has important consequences for ongoing greenhouse gas reductions in the future. Rising transport emissions are the result of growth in the number and use of vehicles in the ACT, including a rise in diesel-powered vehicles (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Transport). Diesel-powered passenger vehicles have increased threefold in the ACT, from 4% of total passenger vehicles in 2010 to 12% in 2019.26 Diesel engines are higher in greenhouse gas emissions than equivalent petrol-fuelled cars.27 Studies have also shown that the greenhouse gas emissions from diesel cars, utes and vans in Australia have risen sharply since 2011, effectively cancelling out the cut in pollution from new renewable energy replacing some coal plants.28 The large increase in diesel vehicles is also a concern for air quality given their higher emissions of nitrogen 120 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report oxides and much higher emissions of particulate matter (see section 5.3 Air). Between 2012–13 and 2017–18, the greenhouse gas emissions from diesel fuel nearly doubled from 230 thousand tonnes CO2-e to 395 thousand tonnes, driving up the proportional contribution of diesel to total transport emissions from 23% to 34% over the same period (Figure 16). These figures suggest that diesel-powered vehicles are contributing 29 ACT Government, 2019, ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25, ACT Government, Canberra disproportionally higher greenhouse gas emissions compared to petrol vehicles. To achieve cuts in transport emissions, there will need to be a decrease in the number and use of vehicles in the ACT, especially diesel-powered vehicles. There will also need to be a significant increase in the number of electric vehicles, which combined with the use of renewable energy for charging, will further reduce ACT’s greenhouse gas emissions.29 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 Emissions thousand tonnes CO2-e Petrol E10 Diesel LPG Figure 16: Main sources of transport greenhouse gas emissions (CO2-e) in the ACT by fuel type, 2012–13 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Petrol includes fuels classified as auto gasoline; E10 is regular unleaded petrol blended with 10% ethanol; diesel includes fuels classified as automotive diesel oil. DATA GAPS • More comprehensive data is required on the impacts of climate change on natural ecosystems, the urban environment and human health to improve knowledge, adaptation and resilience. • To inform future greenhouse gas emission reductions, there will need to be improved data on transport emissions, particularly on the specific contributions of commercial and private transport sectors by fuel types. • More detailed information is required on the ACT’s carbon stocks including by location and vegetation community type, as well as changes over time due to fire and other disturbances such as drought. The ability of natural ecosystems, particularly forests, to sequester carbon is vital for the mitigation of climate change. 121 5.1 Climate change.
5.2 HUMAN SETTLEMENTS 122 05 Indicators, condition and trends © Ryan Colley.
Section contents Indicator assessment 125 Key actions 126 Main findings 126 Introduction 129 Data trends 129 ACT’s population 129 Indicator HS1: ACT’s ecological footprint 132 Indicator HS2: Energy consumption and generation 138 Indicator HS3: Solid waste generation and management 143 Indicator HS4: Transport 147 Indicator HS5: Water resources 157 Indicator HS6: Water consumption 163 Data gaps 167 Energy 167 Waste 167 123 5.2 Human settlements.
total footprint 9 times the size of the ACT ACT’s ecological footprint 2017–18 9x decrease in total footprint since 2009–10 11% of footprint from household consumption 70% decrease in per capita footprint since 2003–04 24% Waste 2015–16 to 2018–19 resource recovery 70% to 80% tonnes per capita 2 to 2.6 tonnes produced annually 1 to 1.2 million inflows to reservoirs below average for all but 2 years since 2001–02 Water 2018–19 inflows the lowest since records began decrease in per capita water use between 2001–02 and 2017–18 37% projected renewable electricity generation by 2020 Electricity 100% decrease in per capita use between 2010–11 and 2017–18 12% of all road transport from passenger vehicles Transport 82% of trips taken are by car 78% increase in diesel vehicles between 2010 and 2019 12% car travel to work: 80% 8% 5% of passenger vehicles are hybrid and electric cars 1% public transport cycling 3% walking Human settlements in the ACT ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 124 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality HS1: ACT’s ecological footprint The ACT’s ecological footprint is over 9 times the size of the land area of the ACT showing that current resource use is unsustainable. Although the ecological footprint is decreasing over time, particularly with the growth in renewable electricity, significant further cuts are required. Households are responsible for 70% of the ACT’s footprint; consequently, decreases in community resource consumption will greatly reduce both the ecological and carbon footprints for the ACT. Poor     High HS2: Energy consumption and generation Due to lack of data, this assessment is limited to electricity consumption and generation. ACT’s electricity consumption has remained stable, despite population growth, reflecting an ongoing decline in per capita usage. The share of renewable electricity generation has increased significantly and is forecast to reach 100% in 2020. Good electricity only  electricity only    High: electricity    Low: all other fuels HS3: Solid waste generation and management The lack of comprehensive and consistent waste data, and high annual variations in waste produced, makes it difficult to assess the status of waste in the ACT. There are no apparent trends indicating long-term changes in the total amount of waste generated, recovered or landfilled. However, the annual resource recovery rate is generally good at around 70% to 75% of the total waste generated, although this has not improved over the last 10 years. Municipal solid waste accounts for the highest proportion of waste sent to landfill and its generation appears to be stable despite the annual population increase in the ACT. Fair     Moderate HS4: Transport The ACT community maintains a high dependence on cars for transport with the number of registered vehicles and their usage increasing. Cars are used for around 80% of all trips undertaken including commuting to work. Public transport, cycling and walking only represent 16% of all travel to work, although public transport use has increased over recent years. Car use contributes to air pollution and greenhouse gases, and has significantly increased road congestion in the ACT. Only 1% of vehicles in the ACT are electric or hybrid. Poor     High HS5: Water resources ACT’s water resources continue to be affected by a long-term period of mostly dry conditions. In 2018–19, total inflows to the ACT’s 4 drinking supply reservoirs was 32 gigalitres, the lowest since records began in 1912, and 86% below the long-term average. At the end of June 2019, the ACT’s 4 reservoirs were holding just 57% of the total ACT storage capacity. Over the past 10 years, only 12–17% of the total wastewater produced is recycled in the ACT. Poor     High HS6: Water consumption The ACT and Queanbeyan’s total water consumption has remained fairly consistent since 2012–13 at around 50,000 megalitres annually despite population growth. Between 2001–02 and 2017–18, residential per capita water use dropped from 124 kilolitres per year to 78 kilolitres litres per year, a decrease of around 37%. Residential supply is responsible for most of the water use in the ACT, accounting for around 60% of the total supplied annually. Good  High Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 125 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: promote and support sustainable household consumption to further decrease the ACT’s ecological footprint. ACTION 2: encourage the development and uptake of distributed energy storage and microgrid technology in domestic, commercial and government buildings and infrastructure to ensure energy supply is sufficient to meet the likely increased demands of the ACT’s growing population and periods of high usage due to climate change. ACTION 3: develop strategies to move toward a circular economy to improve waste recovery rates and reduce resource consumption and waste to landfill. ACTION 4: develop strategies to improve the uptake of public transport and active travel, including increasing cycling participation across gender and age groups. ACTION 5: provide incentives to encourage the purchase of electric and hybrid vehicles, and reduce the purchase of diesel powered vehicles. ACTION 6: identify opportunities to develop water–sensitive urban design across new and existing urban areas. This urban design should incorporate integrated water cycle management to enable the capture and use of stormwater, and create habitat for ACT’s biodiversity. ACTION 7: increase wastewater recycling and use across the ACT for non-potable water needs. Main findings Population In 2018, the ACT’s population was approximately 423,000. In the 10-year period between 2008 and 2018 the population grew by approximately 72,000 people, an average annual increase 1.7% per year. Districts with the highest population include Belconnen (24%), Tuggeranong (21%), Central Canberra (20%) and Gungahlin (18%). Gungahlin experienced the highest population growth, accounting for over 50% of total growth over the decade to 2016. Belconnen and North Canberra both grew by around 11,000 people over the same period. The ACT’s population is projected to increase to around 589,000 people by 2041. Population growth will increase current pressures on the ACT’s environment. Footprint In 2017–18, the total ecological footprint for the ACT was around 2.12 million hectares. This is over nine times the size of the ACT and shows that current resource use is unsustainable. The ACT’s ecological footprint has consequences for areas of Australia and overseas that provide the resources, goods and services consumed by the ACT community. Since 2009–10, the total ACT ecological footprint has decreased by nearly 11%. In 2017–18, the per capita footprint was 5.24 hectares, a decrease of nearly a quarter since 2003–04. The ACT’s per capita ecological footprint is now equivalent to that for the average Australian. Since 2009–10, the total carbon footprint decreased by over 20% and the per capita carbon footprint by 34%. The per capita ACT carbon footprint is now 11% lower than that of Australia. Household final consumption of goods and services is responsible for 70% of the ACT’s ecological footprint. ACT’s ecological footprint is dominated by land disturbance from the pasture required for animal products. However, in per capita terms, the area of land disturbance from pasture requirements decreased by 23% between 2003–04 and 2017–18. Land disturbance from emissions declined by one-third between 2003–04 and 2017–18 reflecting the ACT’s growing renewable electricity supply. Impacts from food expenditure accounted for 50% of the ACT’s total ecological footprint in 2017–18. Expenditure on mobility accounted for 25% of the total carbon footprint in 2017–18 compared to 19% in 2003–04. Transport will likely become the highest contributor to the ACT’s carbon footprint in the future. 126 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Energy Data on the ACT’s energy use is not sufficient to enable a comprehensive assessment of the ACT’s energy generation and consumption. This includes a lack of data on energy consumption for fuel types other than electricity, and the consumption of energy by sector. Electricity demand in the ACT is stable, despite population growth. Electricity consumption per capita decreased by 12% between 2010–11 and 2017–18. The ACT’s total renewable electricity generation increased significantly between 2015–16 and 2017–18, rising from 20% to nearly 50% of electricity generated. Predicted renewable electricity generation for the period 2018–19 to 2020–21 shows that the ACT is forecast to reach 100% in 2020. The ACT will be the first jurisdiction in Australia and the eighth jurisdiction globally, to procure renewable generation equivalent to 100% of its consumption. Wind farms supply the majority of the ACT’s renewable electricity. Wind farm generation significantly increased from 7% in 2016–17 to over 50% in 2018–19, and will supply over 70% of total renewable electricity in 2019–20 and 2020–21. Rooftop solar photovoltaic generation continues to be installed in the ACT and has increased its share of renewable electricity generation in recent years. The only renewable electricity generated in the ACT comes from solar farm and rooftop solar generation. Waste Waste data currently excludes waste exported outside the ACT. This means that the data reported understates the actual volume of waste sent to landfill. Total waste generation, waste to landfill and resources recovered are highly variable in the ACT with changes mostly occurring in response to specific activity from the construction and demolition sector (including the Mr Fluffy program) as well as increases in garden waste. The annual total waste generated in the ACT between 2009–10 and 2018–19 ranged from 816,000 to 1.2 million tonnes, with no consistent trend over time. Between 2009–10 and 2018–19, annual landfill per capita ranged from 0.5 to 1.1 tonnes per person, resources recovered from 1.2 to 2 tonnes per person, and total waste between 2 and 2.6 tonnes per person with no consistent trend over time. Resource recovery is generally much higher than waste sent to landfill, with most years recording a resource recovery rate of 70% or higher. Annual resource recovery in the ACT has plateaued to around 70% to 75% of the total waste generated or 0.55 tonnes per person (excluding the Mr Fluffy program). Waste from the Mr Fluffy program accounted for 40% (202,000 tonnes) of the total waste sent to landfill in 2016–17. This declined to 5% (12,000 tonnes) in 2018–19 with the majority of the program completed. Excluding the Mr Fluffy program, between 2016–17 and 2018–19, municipal solid waste accounted for the highest proportion of the annual total waste sent to landfill (between 39% and 49%), closely followed by commercial and industrial waste (between 35% and 47%). Construction and demolition waste varied widely over the period, from 25% of the total waste sent to landfill in 2016–17, to only 6% and 9% in the following years. Total municipal solid waste generation appears to be stable despite the annual population increase in the ACT. This may indicate improved recycling behaviours and/or changes in the consumption of goods and services leading to a decline in waste per person. During the reporting period, ACT was found to comply with the National Environment Protection Measures related to waste management (includes the Movement of Controlled Waste between States and Territories, and Used Packaging Materials). Transport Private vehicle use The ACT community is highly dependent on cars which are used for 78% of all trips undertaken. Public transport is only used for 4% of trips and cycling only 2%. Although the most common purpose for car travel was work related, cars are the main transport choice for a range of daily activities. Cars were used for over 80% of travel to work with most commuting undertaken with the driver as the sole vehicle occupant. Public transport was used for only 8% of travel to work, cycling 5% and walking 3%. There was little change in travel-to-work transport modes between 2011 and 2016. The number of registered vehicles in the ACT has grown from around 253,000 vehicles in 2010 to 304,000 in 2018, an increase of 20%. Passenger vehicles were responsible for 84% of total vehicle registrations and light commercial vehicles 10%. Vehicle usage is increasing in the ACT. In 2018, ACT’s registered vehicles travelled nearly 3,900 million kilometres, with passenger vehicles responsible for 82% of the total kilometres travelled. The next most common category was light commercial vehicles accounting for 13% of kilometres travelled. 127 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Private vehicle use (continued) Between 2002 and 2017, daily commute times increased by 65% in the ACT, the highest of any Australian city. The ACT’s mean daily commute time in 2017 was 52 minutes, which means that the ACT’s commute times are approaching those recorded in other Australian cities. In 2019, 86% of registered passenger vehicles were fuelled by petrol making it the dominant fuel type in the ACT. Diesel fuelled 12% of vehicles in 2019, a threefold increase since 2010. The large increase in diesel vehicles is of concern given their increased impact on air pollution, especially particulate matter emissions. Hybrid and electric cars only make up 1% of the total passenger vehicles in the ACT but, in terms of vehicle numbers, have increased from around 150 in 2010 to nearly 2,900 in 2019. The ACT, along with South Australia, have the highest number of electric car purchases in Australia, with 21 electric cars per 10,000 vehicles sold. Public transport and active travel Public transport use has been increasing in recent years, growing from 17.6 million boardings annually (45 boardings per capita) in 2014–15 to 20.1 million (48 per capita) in 2018–19. The 2018–19 figures include nearly 878,000 light rail boardings in just over two months between its commencement on 20 April 2019 and 30 June 2019. Cycling is highly variable across the ACT with the Civic area having a significantly higher uptake of cycling, likely due to a flatter terrain and shorter distances to work and study centres. Between 2011 and 2019, cycling participation in the ACT was higher than the national average. Despite this, there are wide variations in year-to-year cycling participation and a statistically significant decline in ACT’s weekly cycling participation between 2017 and 2019. In 2019, the ACT had some 3,100 km of shared paths and some 600 km of on-road cycling facilities. Given the high level of cycling infrastructure in the ACT, there is much scope for improving cycling participation, including across gender and age groups. Water resources and consumption Water resources During 2018–19, total inflow to the ACT’s four reservoirs was 32 gigalitres, the lowest since records began in 1912, and 86% below the long-term average. ACT’s water resources are being affected by a long-term period of mostly dry conditions. Water availability has declined significantly in the ACT with mean storage volumes around 40% below the long-term average for the past 20 years. Between 2001–02 and 2018–19, total inflows to the ACT’s four reservoirs were below the long-term average for all but two years. At the end of June 2019, the ACT’s four reservoirs were holding just 57% (157 gigalitres) of the total ACT storage capacity. This is despite the enlargement of the Cotter Dam in 2013 which increased the ACT’s water storage by 72 gigalitres. Without the increase to the Cotter Dam, the combined ACT storages would have dropped to around 30% of their total capacity – similar to levels during the Millennium Drought. Between 2009–10 and 2018–19, there was little variation in the ACT’s wastewater recycling with volumes remaining around 4,000 megalitres to 4,500 megalitres, representing around 12% to 17% of the ACT’s total wastewater produced. The majority of the ACT’s treated wastewater is discharged into the Molonglo River providing environmental flows, protecting riverine ecosystems and providing for downstream use. Potable water consumption The ACT and Queanbeyan’s total water consumption has remained fairly consistent since 2012–13 at around 50,000 megalitres annually, despite increases in the population serviced. Water usage in 2017–18 was 54,000 megalitres, the highest volume over the past 10 years. This increase has been driven by hotter and drier weather conditions and is not necessarily indicative of an increasing trend in water usage. Between 2001–02 and 2017–18, residential per capita water use dropped from 124 kilolitres per year to 78 kilolitres per year, a decrease of around 37%. The ACT uses over 90% of the water supplied, with Queanbeyan using around 8%. Residential supply accounts for around 60% of the total water supplied annually, this has remained consistent since 2008–09. Most gains in water use efficiency can be made at the household level. 128 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION This section provides an assessment of the pressures on the environment from human settlement activities in the ACT. The following indicators are assessed: • HS1: ACT’s ecological footprint • HS2: Energy consumption and generation • HS3: Solid waste generation and management • HS4: Transport • HS5: Water resources • HS6: Water consumption A range of human settlement activities impact on the environment. The use of energy (including transport energy) and water, as well as the consumption of goods and services, place pressure on the environment through demands on resources and waste generation. Population is a key driver of environmental pressure from human settlement activities. As the population increases, so does the demand for energy and resources, the amount of waste generated, and the need for land development for infrastructure, housing, and energy production. Consequently, everyday decisions made by the community are critical to reducing human settlement pressures on the environment. For example, minimising vehicle use, increasing water and energy efficiency in the home, reducing the consumption of goods, choosing products that are better for the environment, and improving recycling and reuse. The consumption of fuels and the generation of waste are also the major source of air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions in the ACT. Information on air quality can be found in section 5.3 Air, and information on and greenhouse gas emissions can be found in section 5.1 Climate Change. DATA TRENDS ACT’s population This section discusses changes in the ACT’s population. For information on population density and the impacts of population growth on the ACT’s land use, see section 5.4 Land. Whilst population growth is a critical driver and indicator of environmental pressure and change, this report does not include a condition assessment of population change. However, it is important to include population data to understand changes in many of the indicators used for this report. Environmental pressures are exacerbated by a growing population as it increases the demand for energy, transport, resources such as water, and a range of goods and services. This leads to land use change for food production, housing and other infrastructure, and more waste going back into the environment. Such changes can lead to direct impacts on the environment through the loss of vegetation and biodiversity, increased water extraction and degradation of water quality, increased air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, and increased land and water impacts from waste. Although a growing population generally results in increases in environmental pressures, this can be minimised by improving sustainability through energy and resource use efficiencies, and by reducing waste through improved recycling and reuse. 129 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Population growth in the ACT In 2018, the ACT’s population was approximately 423,000 (Figure 1). The ACT has experienced strong and sustained population growth – in the 10-year period between 2008 and 2018 the population grew by approximately 72,000 people, an average annual increase of 7,200 or 1.7% per year. The average annual increase over the 10-year period was variable, driven by a combination of factors including natural increase, retention of people of a diversity of ages, and immigration from overseas and interstate. The ACT’s 2016 population share by district is shown in Figure 2. Districts with the highest population include Belconnen (24%), Tuggeranong (21%), Central Canberra (20%) and Gungahlin (18%). 1 Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), 2019, 3101.0 Australian Demographic Statistics, March 2019, ABS,Canberra Areas of the ACT experiencing the highest population growth include Gungahlin which accounted for over 50% (around 39,000 people) of the total growth over the decade to 2016, and Belconnen and North Canberra which both grew by around 11,000 people over the decade. Other growth areas included Molonglo and South Canberra with both adding around 4,000 people, and Woden Valley increasing by 2,800 people. Tuggeranong recorded a population decline of nearly 2,000 people over the 10-year period. The ACT’s population is projected to increase to around 589,000 people by 2041. This will increase pressures on the ACT’s environment and will require effective sustainability and land use measures to minimise the impacts of such growth. 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 500,000 600,000 2041 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Population Figure 1: ACT estimated resident population 2008–2018 (as at 31 December) and projected population in 2041. Data sourced from: Australian Bureau of Statistics1 and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 130 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 2: ACT 2016 – population share by district Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, 2018, Planning Strategy 2018, ACT Government, Canberra. 131 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator HS1: ACT’s ecological footprint Estimates of the ACT’s ecological footprint have been provided for the four previous ACT State of the Environment reports. An ecological footprint assesses impacts in terms of the Australian land area (in hectares) needed to support a population. This comprises the land for agriculture, forestry, built environments and water required to provide a range of resources, and all goods and services. A footprint also includes a general estimate for the land deemed to be disturbed by the greenhouse gas emissions arising from the population’s resource use and consumption of goods and services. Changes in the ecological footprint are an overall measure of the effect our daily activities and resource consumption have on the environment. While the size of the total footprint is influenced by increasing population and changes to industry, individual behaviours can also affect sustainability. Actions to minimise resource use and waste can help to reduce the ACT’s ecological footprint. The ecological footprint used for this report uses a land disturbance approach. This is a different assessment from the footprints reported in previous ACT State of the Environment reports. It is based on areas of land use which are weighted by disturbance factors to account for how transformed each land type is from a pristine state. In addition, the calculation of an emissions land component is included. The emissions land component converts the total greenhouse gas emissions to a disturbed land area and is calculated from a full carbon footprint. The change in methodology means that results from the current ecological footprint assessment cannot be compared with previous reporting periods. However, the new methodology has been applied to previous years’ data to provide an assessment of changes to the ACT’s footprint over time. The ACT’s environmental footprint has been calculated for 2003–04, 2009–10, 2015–16 and 2017–18. For the carbon footprint, the amount of greenhouse gas stored in the ACT’s ecosystems is included in all calculations. ACT’s total ecological footprint In 2017–18, the total ecological footprint for the ACT was around 2.19 million hectares, Figure 3). This is over nine times the size of the ACT and means that at current consumption levels, we need an area nine times the size of the ACT to provide the resources, goods and services we use, and to regulate our pollution. It is clear that our current resource use is unsustainable, placing enormous stress on the earth’s natural ecosystems. It is also evident that the ACT’s ecological footprint has consequences for areas of Australia and overseas that provide the wide range of resources, goods and services consumed by the ACT community. The ACT total footprint peaked in 2009–10 at just under 2.45 million hectares. Since then, the footprint has decreased by nearly 11% despite population growth of over 16% over the same period. This is due to the significant decrease in ACT’s per capita footprint which has fallen by nearly a quarter from 6.9 hectares per person in 2003–04 to 5.24 hectares in 2017–18 (Figure 4). The decrease means that ACT’s per capita footprint is now equivalent to that for Australia, having been higher for 2003–04, 2009–10 and 2015–16. 132 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017–18 2015–16 2009–10 2003–04 Million hectares Figure 3: ACT total ecological footprint (disturbance), 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 2017–18 2015–16 2009–10 2003–04 ACT per capita footprint Hectares per capita Australian per capita footprint Figure 4: ACT and Australian per capita ecological footprint (disturbance), 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment 133 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report ACT’s carbon footprint The total carbon footprint of the ACT population was approximately 5.93 million tonnes carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2-e) in 2017–18 (Figure 5). This is a decrease of over 20% from a peak of 7.45 million tonnes CO2-e in 2009–10. This decrease has occurred despite continued population growth in the ACT over the period, and is a result of a significant decrease in the per capita carbon footprint. The per capita carbon footprint for the ACT fell from 21.5 tonnes CO2-e in 2003–04 to 14.2 in 2017–18, a reduction of around 34% (Figure 6). The per capita ACT carbon footprint was 7.5% higher than the per capita Australian footprint in 2003–04, but is now 11% lower than that of Australia. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2017–18 2015–16 2009–10 2003–04 Million tonnes CO2-equivalent Figure 5: ACT total carbon footprint (disturbance), 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment 0 5 10 15 20 25 2017–18 2015–16 2009–10 2003–04 ACT per capita CO2 footprint Tonnes CO2-equivalent per capita Australian per capita CO2 footprint Figure 6: ACT and Australian per capita carbon footprint (disturbance), 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment 134 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Components of the ACT’s ecological footprint 2 Household final consumption consists of goods and services households buy directly to support their day-to-day lives. Household final consumption2 is responsible for most (around 70%) of the ACT’s ecological footprint for all years assessed (Figure 7). This shows the importance of changing community behaviour to minimise resource consumption and waste. Education and awareness-raising on sustainable consumption is imperative to reduce components of both the ecological and carbon footprints for the ACT. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017–18 2015–16 2009–10 2003–04 Household final consumption Million hectares Other final demand Figure 7: Final demand contributions to the ACT ecological footprint (disturbance), 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Notes: Household final consumption consists of goods and services households buy directly to support their day-to-day lives; Other final demand comprises private and government final consumption, private and government gross fixed capital formation, changes in inventories (stocks), and exports. ACT’s ecological footprint is dominated by land disturbance as a result of the large land area required for pasture to produce products such as meat, milk and fibre (Figure 8). The pasture required to meet the ACT’s demand for such products accounted for around 70% of the per capita footprint for each year assessed. However, the area of land disturbance from pasture requirements has decreased by around 23% from 4.8 hectares per capita in 2003–04, to 3.7 hectares in 2017–18. The next highest component of the ACT’s footprint was emissions land which was responsible for around 20% of the land disturbance for each year assessed. The per capita area of disturbance from emissions land has also significantly declined in the ACT, from 1.5 hectares per capita in 2003–04 to around one hectare in 2017–18, a decrease of around one-third. The falling contribution from emissions land reflects the ACT’s growing renewable electricity supply. Other components have a relatively small contribution to the per capita land disturbance footprint and show little change over time. These include disturbances from dry cropland (around 4% of the per capita footprint for all assessed years), forestry (around 2%) and the built environment (around 1%). Results for the built environment again reflects just how little of the ACT’s per capita ecological footprint is contained within the ACT. 135 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2017–18 2015–16 2009–10 2003–04 Pasture Hectares per capita Emissions land Dry cropland Forestry Plantations Irrigated cropland Nature conservation Water Built land Figure 8: ACT ecological footprint (disturbance) components per capita, 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment ACT’s ecological footprint by expenditure Ecological footprint calculations can also be considered by consumption category. This can help guide community action and government policy aimed at reducing the ACT’s footprint. The consumption categories are food, shelter, energy use, mobility, goods, services and other. All flow-on impacts are included within each category. For example, the land required to grow wheat and the energy used to harvest the wheat is all included within the food category. The services category covers a large number of services, including telecommunications, finance, medicine, entertainment and government. The provision of food dominates most ecological footprints due to the extensive land required for the average diet. Food expenditure accounted for around 50% of the ACT’s total footprint for all years assessed with no evident trend (Figure 9). Selecting more locally-produced and alternative sources of protein with lower footprints could substantially reduce the overall footprint of the ACT. Services was the next highest contributor to the footprint at around 20% for all years assessed, again with no clear trend. Goods decreased from 269,000 hectares (11% of the total footprint) in 2009–10, to around 186,000 hectares (8% of the total footprint) in 2017–18. The contribution from goods is falling as expenditure patterns shift further towards services. Energy use has also decreased from 6% to 4% of the total footprint reflecting the growth in renewable energy. 136 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 Other Services Goods Mobility Energy use Shelter Food 2003–04 Million hectares 2009–10 2015–16 2017–18 Figure 9: ACT total environmental footprint by expenditure group, 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment For carbon footprints, the expenditure groups have a much more even contribution with services, mobility and food all making substantial contributions to the ACT’s carbon footprint. There has been a notable decrease in the carbon footprint from energy due to the increase of renewable electricity in the ACT. The energy footprint fell from around 1.75 million tonnes CO2-e (23% of the total carbon footprint) in 2009–10, to around 900,000 tonnes CO2-e (15%) in 2017–18 (Figure 10). In 2017–18, mobility was responsible for 25% of the total carbon footprint, rising from 19% in 2002–03. However, in terms of total tonnes CO2-e there has been little change in mobility since 2009–10 with the change in percentage contribution mainly due a decreasing energy footprint. Other changes in the carbon footprint include a 168,000 tonnes CO2-e (10%) decrease from services between 2009–10 and 2017–18, and a 120,000 tonnes CO2-e (14%) decrease from goods over the same period. 137 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 Other Services Goods Mobility Energy use Shelter Food 2003–04 Million tonnes CO2-equivalent 2009–10 2015–16 2017–18 Figure 10: ACT total carbon footprint by expenditure group, 2003–04 to 2017–18. Source: Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Drivers of change The main drivers for changes in the ACT ecological footprint include: • a very slow rate of increase in household final consumption since 2008 • a decrease in median household income leading to a plateauing of expenditure increases • a decline in expenditure on components with higher footprint intensities • increases in housing costs contributing to reduced expenditure • increases in the services component of ACT household expenditure (health and education in particular) • relatively small increases in household greenhouse gas emissions • increase in renewable electricity reducing the energy footprint • household consumption contributes most to the ACT’s total footprint • private car emissions are now one of the ACT’s biggest carbon footprint components and are likely to increase with the growth in private vehicle use and commuting times, and • air travel was only responsible for around 3.5% of the total 2017–18 carbon footprint, but is growing. Indicator HS2: Energy consumption and generation This indicator assesses ACT’s energy use. For greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution resulting from energy generation and use, see sections 5.1 Climate change and 5.3 Air. Energy is central to everyday life for both social and economic activity. The level of energy use is determined by a range of factors including population and economic activity. Another significant driver of energy use is climate through increased demand for heating and cooling. Consequently, climate change will increase energy demand in the future with more frequent hot days and heatwave periods although this may be partially offset by a reduction in colder temperatures (see section 5.1 Climate change). The environmental impacts of energy use are determined by the type of generation. Non-renewable energy based on fossil fuels (including transport fuels) make significant contributions to greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution. They also impact on the environment through land use changes (both resource extraction and infrastructure requirements) that cause habitat loss and degradation of land and water, and can require high levels of water consumption. Renewable energy such as solar, 138 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report wind and hydro-electricity have substantially lower environmental impacts, particularly for greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution, but can still impact on the environment through land use change and the use of hazardous material for construction and maintenance. Hydro-electricity also affects aquatic health due to the alteration of river flows. Regardless of generation type, it is vital to reduce energy demand to minimise environmental impacts. With the population increasing in the ACT, reducing energy usage and improving energy efficiency will negate the need for new energy generation infrastructure. With the ACT moving to 100% renewable energy for electricity generation, transport will become the main focus for further reductions in non-renewable energy consumption. Reductions will necessitate an increase in the number of electric vehicles, which combined with renewable energy for charging, will further reduce ACT’s energy consumption impacts. In addition, the phasing out of natural gas will also be important. 3 Department of the Environment and Energy, 2019, Australian Energy Update 2019, found at https://www.energy.gov.au/ publications/australian-energy-update-2019 (accessed 6 October 2019). It was not possible to obtain data for the ACT’s energy consumption by fuel other than for electricity. Consequently, natural gas, petroleum and other fuel types are not reported here. It was also not possible to obtain data on energy consumption by sector. These are key data gaps which prevent a comprehensive assessment of the ACT’s energy consumption and generation. For example, reporting on electricity alone excludes the contributions of oil and petroleum fuels which have been shown to account for the majority of energy consumption in most Australian jurisdictions.3 Electricity consumption Total electricity demand for the ACT and use per capita is shown in Figure 11. Electricity demand in the ACT is relatively stable, despite population growth. This is due to reductions in electricity consumption per capita which decreased by 12% between 2010–11 and 2017–18. This decrease is likely due to a stronger focus on energy efficiency such as the uptake of energy efficient appliances, as well as general efforts to moderate electricity consumption and consumer response to price rises. 0 400 800 1,200 1,600 2,000 2,400 2,800 3,200 3,600 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 Electricity demand (MWh) MWh per person per year Total electricity demand Electricity per capita Figure 11: ACT total and per capita electricity demand, 2010–11 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 139 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Renewable electricity generation 4 Environment and Planning Directorate, 2016, Canberra 100% Renewable: Leading Innovation with 100% Renewable Energy by 2020, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/987991/100- Renewal-Energy-Tri-fold-ACCESS.pdf 5 Cass, D., 2019, Class ACT. How the Australian Capital Territory Became a Global Energy Leader, The Australia Institute, Canberra, found at https://www.tai.org.au/sites/default/files/P708%20Class%20ACT%20%5BWEB%5D_0.pdf (accessed 6 October 2019). 6 Cass, D., 2019, Class ACT. How the Australian Capital Territory Became a Global Energy Leader, The Australia Institute, Canberra, found at https://www.tai.org.au/sites/default/files/P708%20Class%20ACT%20%5BWEB%5D_0.pdf (accessed 6 October 2019). The ACT’s total renewable electricity generation significantly increased between 2015–16 and 2017–18, rising from 20% to nearly 50% of electricity generated (Figure 12). Predicted renewable electricity generation for the period 2018–19 to 2020–21 shows that the ACT is forecast to reach 100% in 2020. This significant achievement means that the ACT Government’s renewable electricity consumption target of 100% by 2020 will be met.4 It also means that the ACT will be the first jurisdiction in Australia, and the eighth jurisdiction globally with a population over 100,000, to achieve the transition from an electricity supply based largely on fossil fuels to procuring renewable generation equivalent to 100% of its consumption.5 In addition, the ACT will be the first jurisdiction outside Europe to achieve 100% renewable electricity. HOW DOES THE ACT’S RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY PROGRAM WORK? Although the ACT will shortly reach 100% renewable electricity, it remains connected to the national electricity grid. This means that the ACT still receives electricity generated from non-renewable sources which may be consumed at any time. However, the ACT has purchased enough renewable energy to meet its electricity needs. This renewable electricity is available to the national grid and is used in other parts of Australia, offsetting the non-renewable energy consumed in the ACT. This is a system used by most of the European jurisdictions that have moved to 100% renewables.6 The system also allows the ACT to keep using the national grid which is important during periods of high demand. The ACT’s renewable energy was purchased using what is known as a reverse auction, where companies were invited to bid to supply renewable energy at the lowest price for the ACT. This has resulted in the development of new renewable energy generation. Ideally, all electricity should come directly from renewable sources where possible. However, this would be difficult for the ACT and other jurisdictions to achieve where sufficient generation opportunities are not available. Consequently, supplying renewable electricity into the national grid is an effective means to achieving 100% renewable electricity, and to reduce the impacts of energy use on the environment. 140 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2020–21 2019–20 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 % of total electricity supply Figure 12: Total renewable electricity generation for the ACT, 2010–11 to 2017–18, and projected renewable generation for 2018–19 to 2020–21. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Wind farms supply the majority of the ACT’s renewable electricity. Wind farm generation significantly increased from 7% in 2016–17 to over 50% in 2018–19, and will supply over 70% of total renewable electricity in 2019–20 and 2020–21 (Figure 13). The second largest renewable electricity source for the ACT comes from the ACT Government’s mandatory contribution to the national renewable energy target. This accounts for around 20% of ACT’s renewable electricity and has remained fairly consistent, increasing by around 1% per year. Solar farm and rooftop solar generation each account for 3% of the current renewable electricity. Rooftop solar PV generation continues to be installed in the ACT, and despite the large increases in other generation, has increased its share of renewable electricity generation in recent years. The location of the ACT’s wind and solar farms supplying the National Electricity Market are shown in (Figure 14). The only renewable electricity generated in the ACT comes from solar farm and rooftop solar generation. The bulk of the power from wind farms and the national renewable energy target are sourced from outside the ACT. There are currently five wind farms, one in South Australia, two in Victoria, and two in NSW. 141 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2020–21 2019–20 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 Wind farm generation % of total electricity supply Share of national Renewable Energy Target Solar farm generation Rooftop solar generation GreenPower purchases Figure 13: Sources of renewable electricity generation for the ACT, 2016–17 to 2020–21. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Notes: Figures for 2020–21 are predicted only. Share of national Renewable Energy Target is the component paid for by ACT electricity consumers as part of their normal electricity bills. Greenpower purchases is the total amount of Greenpower purchased by all ACT electricity consumers. Figure 14: Location of the ACT’s wind and solar farms supplying the National Electricity Market Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, 2016, Canberra 100% Renewable: Leading Innovation with 100% Renewable Energy by 2020, ACT Government, Canberra. 142 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator HS3: Solid waste generation and management The generation of waste places pressure on the environment, requiring land for its disposal, and ongoing management to prevent contamination and pollution. Waste can also have adverse impacts on human health and the liveability of our environment. Depending upon the way it is managed, waste can have a number of different environmental impacts including: • land use change and pollution leading to the degradation of ecosystems and biodiversity loss • increased greenhouse gas emissions • contamination and pollution of soils, groundwater and waterways • presence of hazardous substances • impacts on human health and amenity, and • increased demands on resources required to dispose of and recycle waste. The amount of waste generated is not only determined by population, but also the level of consumption of material resources and manufactured goods. Increased consumption has significant consequences for the environment and for resource demand and depletion, particularly outside the ACT where goods and materials are sourced and manufactured. Waste is also highly influenced by the level of activity in the commercial, industrial, construction and demolition sectors. Waste is produced at all stages in the manufacture of products and services, as well as at the end of a product’s lifecycle. When waste is not reused, recycled or used efficiently there is an opportunity lost, as the material can no longer be used to contribute to the economy. Recycling waste also reduces the demand for resource extraction, and conserves energy and water compared to manufacturing products from raw materials. A large proportion of waste in the ACT comes from construction and demolition activities. Poor planning in design and assembly can lead to inefficient use of resources in manufacturing or construction, leading to unnecessary material waste. The management of such waste can be an economic burden which is passed on down the supply chain of products, increasing the price to the consumer. In the case of construction, poor design can not only create unnecessary material waste, but also a legacy of inefficiency throughout a building’s life. Waste generated in Queanbeyan is processed at ACT recycling facilities and deposited in ACT landfills. Consequently, the waste data reported here includes both the ACT and Queanbeyan. Waste data also currently excludes waste taken to landfill outside the ACT. This means that the data reported understates the actual volume of waste sent to landfill. The waste activity management system that is currently being implemented by the ACT Government will capture this data which is expected to be available in the 2019–20 financial year. Wind Farm. Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 143 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Total waste generation and resource recovery The annual total waste generated in the ACT between 2009–10 and 2018–19 ranged from 816,000 to 1.2 million tonnes, with no consistent trend over time (Figure 15). Waste to landfill ranged from 21% (256,000 tonnes) to 49% (511,000 tonnes), and resources recovered ranged from 51% (534,000 tonnes) to 79% (957,000 tonnes). Despite this variation, it is clear that resource recovery is generally much higher than waste sent to landfill with most years recording a resource recovery rate of 70% or higher. Total waste generation, waste to landfill and resources recovered are highly variable in the ACT with changes mostly occurring in response to specific activity from the construction and demolition sector and increases in garden waste. These waste types are also responsible for most of the resource recovery in the ACT; for example in 2018–19 waste from these sources represented 85% of the total tonnes recovered. The resource recovery rate in recent years has been impacted by the Mr Fluffy program which involves the buyback and demolition of houses containing loose fill asbestos. By 2018–19, the impact was lower than the previous three years, with the majority of the program completed. Excluding waste from the Mr Fluffy program, resource recovery in the ACT has plateaued to around 70% to 75% of the total waste generated. The highest percentage of resources recovered was 79% in 2018–19, due to an increase in construction and demolition materials as well as green waste. The lowest percentage of resource recovery occurred in 2016–17, with only 51% recovered. This low rate was the result of an increase in waste to landfill from asbestos-contaminated waste from the Currong apartments, and contaminated waste from a leachate dam excavation at Mugga lane landfill. 0 150,000 300,000 450,000 600,000 750,000 900,000 1,050,000 1,200,000 1,350,000 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 Tonnes % recovered Waste to landfill Resources recovered % resources recovered Figure 15: Waste generation and management in the ACT, 2009–10 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and City Services 144 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Per capita waste generation and management Waste generation and management per person is an important measure for assessing trends in waste practices and behaviours. For example, results in per capita assessments can demonstrate improvements in recycling and consumer awareness, as well as improved industry standards in packaging practices. Such changes can be masked by total waste assessments which are more closely aligned to population increases. Results for per capita resource recovery, landfill and total waste also show the same variation in response to specific activity from the construction and demolition sector. Landfill per capita ranged from 0.5 to 1.1 tonnes per person, resources recovered from 1.2 to 2 tonnes per person, and total waste between 2 and 2.6 tonnes per person with no consistent trend over time (Figure 16). Excluding the Mr Fluffy program, per capita waste to landfill has plateaued around 0.55 tonnes per person. The 2018–19 result is slightly lower than this trend at 0.52 tonnes per person due to lower commercial and industrial waste to landfill. Over last few years the resource recovery tonnes per person has plateaued around 1.5 to 1.6 tonnes per person, except for 2016–17 which was only 1.2 tonnes per person. The 2016–17 result was affected by a reduction in the recycling of construction and demolition waste and the absence of data from a major recycler who declined to provide its data. If these impacts are excluded, the 2016–17 result is estimated to be around 1.5 tonnes per person. The highest resources recovered per capita was in 2018–19 at around 2 tonnes per person. This is mainly the result of the increased activity in the construction and demolition sector and an increase in green waste recovered. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 Tonnes per capita Landfill per capita Resources recovered per capita Total waste generation per capita Figure 16: Per capita waste generation and management in the ACT, 2009–10 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and City Services 145 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Waste sent to landfill by sector Changes in the methodology used to report waste in the ACT means that it is not possible to include long-term trends for waste by sector in the ACT. Consequently, it is only possible to report sector contributions from 2016–17. Waste from the Mr Fluffy program accounted for 40% (202,000 tonnes) of the total waste sent to landfill in 2016–17. This declined to 26% (90,000 tonnes) in 2017–18 and 5% (12,000 tonnes) in 2018–19 with the majority of the program already completed. Sector waste to landfill excluding the Mr Fluffy program is shown in Figure 17. Municipal solid waste accounts for the highest proportion of the waste sent to landfill, closely followed by commercial and industrial waste. Over the three years of available data, municipal solid waste contributed between 39% and 49% of the waste sent to landfill; however, in terms of tonnes, there was little variation over the period. Commercial and industrial waste contributed between 35% and 47% of the total waste sent to landfill. Construction and demolition waste varied widely over the period, from 25% of the total waste sent to landfill in 2016–17 to only 6% and 9% in the following years. The high amount in 2016–17 was from asbestos-contaminated waste from the Currong apartments, and contaminated waste from a leachate dam excavation at Mugga lane landfill. Given the short data period, it is not possible to determine any trends in sector contributions to landfill. However, municipal solid waste appears to be stable despite the annual population increase in the ACT. This may indicate improved recycling behaviours and/or changes in the consumption of goods and services leading to a decline in waste per person. Construction and demolition waste, and to a lesser degree, commercial and industrial waste, are more variable and are related to activity changes in those sectors. 0 50,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 300,000 350,000 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 Municipal solid waste % of total electricity supply Commercial and industrial Construction and demolition Figure 17: Waste sent to landfill by sector, 2016–17 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and City Services 146 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Compliance with waste National Environment Protection Measures 7 National Environment Protection Council (NEPC), 2019, NEPC Annual Report 2017–2018, Canberra, found at http://www.nepc. gov.au/system/files/resources/1ed358dc-9aee-442f-9821-78ce95bf20a6/files/nepc-annual-report-2017-18.pdf (accessed 13/10/2019). There are two National Environment Protection Measures (NPEM) related to waste: • Movement of Controlled Waste between States and Territories NPEM: provides a means of tracking the movement of controlled waste between states and territories to minimise the potential for adverse impacts associated with the movement of controlled waste on human health and the environment. • Used Packaging Materials NEPM: aims to reduce environmental degradation arising from the disposal of used packaging and to conserve virgin materials. The ACT must report compliance with these measures to the National Environment Protection Council. During the reporting period, ACT was found to comply with both waste NEPMs.7 For the Used Packaging Materials NEPM, the ACT previously met this obligation under the Waste Minimisation (Used Packaging Materials Industry Waste Reduction Plan). This was repealed on 30 June 2017 when the Waste Management and Resource Recovery Act 2016 commenced. The Used Packaging Materials Industry Waste Reduction Plan was not replaced until 30 June 2019, when the used packaging material compliance measure was reinstated. Development is currently underway to ensure the ACT meets its obligations under the Used Packaging Materials NEPM. Indicator HS4: Transport This section assesses private and public transport which accounts for the vast majority of transport demand in the ACT. Transport undertaken for business and industry purposes are not assessed. Transport is an essential part of modern living, enabling the movement of people and goods for work, education, industry, social connection and recreation. However, road-based transport in the ACT and globally is dominated by vehicles, mainly private cars. This requires continual investment in extensive infrastructure such as roads and parking areas to cope with growing transport needs, as well as increased demand for fossil fuels. This has many environmental impacts including: • air pollutants including carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter (see section 5.3 Air) • greenhouse gas emissions (see section 5.1 Climate Change) • reliance on non-renewable fuels • land clearing and habitat loss for roads and other infrastructure, and • loss of amenity due to noise. Transport emissions are particularly important for the ACT. With the Territory moving to 100% renewable electricity in 2019–20, transport will account for over 60% of greenhouse gas emissions, by far the dominant source (see section 5.1 Climate Change). Most of the ACT’s transport emissions come from passenger vehicles. Private modes of transport such as cars are less efficient at moving large numbers of people and so have greater impacts on the environment than public transport. In addition to environmental impacts, the increased use of private vehicles leads to greater congestion and travel times, and demand for new road infrastructure. Consequently, improving the uptake of public and alternative forms of transport, as well as increasing the number of electric vehicles, is important for the ACT. Urban expansion and population growth are the main drivers for escalation in private car usage. Urban spread has also increased requirements for transport infrastructure in the ACT, including the expansion of freeways. 147 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Transport modes in the ACT The ACT community is highly dependent on cars. A 2017 survey of daily travel undertaken in the ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, found that 78% of all trips were undertaken by car including 55% as a driver and 23% as a passenger (Figure 18).8 Bus transport only accounted for 4% of trips, and cycling only 2%. Walking was the second highest mode with 14% of the total trips taken. However, it should be noted that walking data includes that undertaken for recreation (for example, dog walking or for exercise) which accounted for nearly 40% of all walking trips, and so does not necessarily represent travel to a specific destination. The survey also determined that the most common purpose for car travel was work related which accounted for 27% of all car travel (Figure 19). Other common reasons for car use included picking up or dropping off someone (19%), social and recreation (15%) and to buy something (13%). This spread of car use across a range of purposes means that 8 ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, 2017, Household Travel Survey (ACTQP HTS), found at https://www.transport. act.gov.au/about-us/planning-for-the-future/household-travel-survey (accessed 15 October 2019). 9 Environment and Planning Directorate, 2015, Building an Integrated Transport Network, Active Travel, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.transport.act.gov.au/about-us/active-travel?a=888712 (accessed 15 October 2019). 10 Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), 2011 and 2016, Census of Population and Housing 2011, 2016, ABS, Canberra. cars are the main transport choice for a range of daily activities. The ACT community’s dependence on cars is further shown in a comparison of the transport modes used to travel to work. Cars were used for over 80% of travel to work (Figure 20) with car as driver accounting for 74%. This not only shows the dominance of car use for travel to work, but also that most commuting by car is undertaken with the driver as the sole vehicle occupant. Public transport was used for only 8% of travel to work, cycling 5% and walking 3%. The ACT Government has commuting-to-work targets to be achieved by 2026.9 These include increasing the mode share of public transport to 16%, and walking and cycling to 7% each. The travel- to-work data reported here shows that these targets are currently not being met. The Australian Bureau of Statistics also reports on methods of travel to work. A comparison of results between 2011 and 2016 show little change in transport modes in the ACT over the 5-year period.10 Cycling (2%) Vehicle driver (55%) Vehicle passenger (23%) Bus (4%) Other (2%) Walking (14%) Figure 18: Daily travel mode undertaken in the ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang region. Data sourced from: ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, 2017, Household Travel Survey (ACTQP HTS). Notes: Based on a survey of 1,785 households and 4,611 people in both the ACT and Queanbeyan. Each participant completed a travel diary for a single specified day across October and November 2017. Walking includes all purposes, including for recreation such as fitness and dog walking. 148 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Pick up/drop off someone (19%) Personal business (10%) Education (7%) Social/recreation (15%) Buy something (13%) Other/not stated (9%) Work related (27%) Figure 19: Daily car use by travel purpose for the ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang region. Data sourced from: ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, 2017, Household Travel Survey (ACTQP HTS). Notes: Based on a survey of 1,785 households and 4,611 people in both the ACT and Queanbeyan. Each participant completed a travel diary for a single specified day across October and November 2017. Public transport (8%) Walked only (3%) Other (1%) Motorbike (2%) Bicycle (5%) Car as driver (74%) Car as passenger (7%) Figure 20: Commute to work by mode for the ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang region. Data sourced from: ACT and Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, 2017, Household Travel Survey (ACTQP HTS). Notes: Based on a survey of 1,785 households and 4,611 people in both the ACT and Queanbeyan. Each participant completed a travel diary for a single specified day across October and November 2017. 149 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Vehicle numbers and kilometres travelled 11 Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), 2019, 9309.0 Motor Vehicle Census, Australia, 31 January 2019, ABS, Canberra The number of registered vehicles in the ACT has grown from around 253,000 vehicles in 2010, to over 304,000 in 2018, an increase of 20% (Figure 21). In 2018, passenger vehicles were responsible for 84% (255,000) of the total vehicle registrations (Figure 22). Light commercial vehicles accounted for 10% of the total vehicle registrations. Light commercial vehicles include some types of sports utility vehicles, which are being increasingly used by the community for non-work purposes. These large vehicles are more damaging to the environment, with increased emissions of air pollutants due to higher fuel usage. The number of registered vehicles per 1,000 population has also increased in the ACT from 726 in 2014 to 731 in 2019.11 This is mainly due to an increase in passenger vehicles from 607 per thousand people in 2014 to 611 in 2019. The annual kilometres travelled by vehicles was variable between 2010 and 2018, but data shows that vehicle usage is increasing. In 2018, the distance travelled by ACT’s vehicles was nearly 3,900 million kilometres (Figure 21). Similar to registrations, passenger vehicles were responsible for 82% of the total kilometres travelled, with light commercial vehicles accounting for 13% (Figure 23). 3,200 3,300 3,400 3,500 3,600 3,700 3,800 3,900 2018 2016 2014 2012 2010 0 50,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 300,000 350,000 2018 2016 2014 2012 2010 Total kilometres travelled (million kilometres) Number of vehicles Total kilometres travelled Number of vehicles Figure 21: Total kilometres travelled and number of registered vehicles in the ACT, 2010 to 2018. Data sourced from: Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2019, 9309.0 Motor Vehicle Census, Australia, 31 Jan. 2019. Notes: The average number of vehicles registered for 12 months of the year. Data includes registered vehicles that did not travel during the reference period. 150 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Light commercial vehicles (10%) 304,455 total vehicles Trucks (1%) Buses (<1%) Passenger vehicles (84%) Motor cycles (5%) Figure 22: Registered vehicle types in the ACT, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Australian Bureau of Statistics, 9309.0 Motor Vehicle Census, Australia, 31 Jan 2019. Notes: Data shows the average number of vehicles registered for 12 months per year. Includes registered vehicles that did not travel during the reference period. Trucks include rigid, articulated and non-freight carrying categories. Light commercial vehicles (13%) 3,861 total km (million) Trucks (2%) Buses (1%) Passenger vehicles (82%) Motor cycles (2%) Figure 23: Percentage of total vehicle kilometres travelled by vehicle type in the ACT, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Australian Bureau of Statistics, 9309.0 Motor Vehicle Census, Australia, 31 Jan 2019. Notes: Trucks include rigid, articulated and non-freight carrying categories. The growth in registered vehicles and kilometres travelled not only impacts on the environment, but also congestion on the roads in the ACT. Increased time spent on travel to work and other daily activities, and the level of inconvenience and stress experienced in travel, are major factors affecting the liveability of a city. Congestion also has an economic cost because of losses in time at work. 151 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Between 2002 and 2017, daily commute times increased by 65% in the ACT, the highest of any Australian city (Figure 24).12 The mean daily commute time in 2017 was 52 minutes compared to 31 minutes 12 Wilkins, R. et al., 2019, The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia Survey: Selected Findings from Waves 1 to 17, Melbourne Institute: Applied Economic & Social Research, University of Melbourne. in 2002, although the time estimate for 2017 was a slight decline on 2014 which was 55 minutes (Figure 25). The ACT’s commute times are now approaching those recorded in other Australian cities. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% ACT Brisbane Adelaide Perth Sydney Melbourne % change in mean daily commute time Figure 24: Percentage change in mean daily commute time for selected Australian cities, 2002 to 2017. Data sourced from: Wilkins R. et al., 2019, The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia Survey: Selected Findings from Waves 1 to 17, Melbourne Institute: Applied Economic & Social Research, University of Melbourne. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% ACT Brisbane Adelaide Perth Sydney Melbourne % change in mean daily commute time Brisbane Adelaide Perth ACT Sydney Melbourne Figure 25: Mean daily commute time for selected Australian cities, 2002 to 2017. Data sourced from: Wilkins R. et al., 2019, The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia Survey: Selected Findings from Waves 1 to 17, Melbourne Institute: Applied Economic & Social Research, University of Melbourne. 152 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Vehicle fuel types in the ACT 13 ClimateWorks Australia, 2018, The State of Electric Vehicles in Australia. Second Report: Driving Momentum in Electric Mobility, ClimateWorks Australia, Melbourne. In 2019, 86% of registered passenger vehicles were fuelled by petrol making it the dominant fuel type in the ACT (Figure 26). This represents a decline in the proportion of petrol vehicles, which fuelled 94% of all passenger vehicles in 2010. This decline is the result a threefold increase in diesel-powered passenger vehicles over the same period, from 4% of total passenger vehicles in 2010 to 12% in 2019. The large increase in diesel vehicles is of concern as their impact on air pollution is becoming recognised as a problem in both Australia and globally. For example, diesel engines generally have higher emissions of nitrogen oxides and much higher emissions of particulate matter (see section 5.3 Air). Hybrid and electric cars only make up 1% of the total passenger vehicles in the ACT, but in terms of vehicle numbers, have increased from around 150 in 2010 to nearly 2,900 in 2019. The ACT, along with South Australia, have the highest number of electric car purchases in Australia, with 21 electric cars per 10,000 vehicles sold.13 Diesel 29,762 (12%) 2019 Hybrid and electric 2,875 (1%) LPG and LPG/Hybrid 1,447 (1%) Petrol 215,399 (86%) 2010 Diesel 7 ,913 (4%) Hybrid and electric 159 (<1%) LPG and LPG/Hybrid 4,165 (2%) Petrol 196,298 (94%) Figure 26: Vehicle fuel type for registered passenger vehicles in the ACT, 2010 and 2019. Data sourced from: Access Canberra. 153 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Public transport uptake 14 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2015, ACT State of the Environment Report 2015, ACT Government, Canberra. Bus use in the ACT declined sharply from the 1980s to the 2000s (Figure 27), which may have been due to an increase in car affordability.14 Since then, public transport use has remained relatively stable at around 45 to 50 boardings per person each year. However, public transport use has increased in recent years, growing from 17.6 million boardings annually (45 per capita) in 2014–15 to 20.1 million (48 per capita) in 2018–19. The light rail commenced operation on 20 April 2019, with nearly 878,000 boardings to the end of June 2019. The opening of the light rail also coincided with updates to the bus network, and this combination of changes is thought to have contributed to the growth in public transport uptake in 2018–19. 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 1989–90 1983–84 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 1989–90 1983–84 Boardings per year (millions) Boardings per capita per year Boardings per year Boardings per capita per year 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 1989–90 1983–84 Figure 27: Public transport boardings per year and per capita for the ACT, 1983–84 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and City Services. 154 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Cycling uptake 15 Based on 2014 data reported in: Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2015, ACT State of the Environment Report 2015, ACT Government, Canberra. 16 Austroads, 2019, Australian Cycling Participation 2019, Austroads Ltd, Sydney. 17 Austroads, 2019, Australian Cycling Participation 2019, Austroads Ltd, Sydney. Cycling is highly variable across the ACT with the Civic area having a significantly greater uptake of cycling than other parts of Canberra.15 This is likely due to a flatter terrain and shorter distances to work and study centres. Between 2011 and 2019, cycling participation in the ACT was higher than the national average for weekly, monthly and annual participation (Figure 28). In 2019, the ACT had the highest cycling rate of Australian jurisdictions for both weekly and monthly participation, and second highest for annual participation.16 Despite this, there are wide variations in cycling participation across survey years and a statistically significant decline in ACT’s weekly cycling participation between 2017 and 2019. It must be noted that the cycling data includes physical activity participation (the most common reason for cycling). This means that changes in cycling participation may not reflect changes in the use of cycling for actual transport to work or for other purposes. The absence of a growing trend in cycling participation in Australia is contrary to the investment made by governments in promoting and encouraging cycling.17 This is certainly the case for the ACT which has extensive cycling infrastructure. In 2019, the ACT had around 3,100 km of shared paths and some 600 km of on-road cycling lanes. The paths cover 10 principal cycle routes in the ACT, links between these routes, and connect town centres and major employment districts. Given the high level of cycling infrastructure in the ACT, there is much scope for improving cycling participation, including across gender and age groups. 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 2019 2017 2015 2013 2011 Cycling participation (%) Week national average Month national average Year national average Week ACT Month ACT Year ACT Figure 28: Cycling participation for the ACT and the national average for weekly, monthly and annual use, 2011 to 2019. Data sourced from: Austroads, 2019, Australian Cycling Participation 2019, Austroads Ltd, Sydney. 155 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY BIKE BAROMETER The ACT Government installed a bike barometer at the juncture between the Sullivan’s Creek shared path and MacArthur Avenue in O’Connor in November 2017. Data is provided on an hourly basis in two directions, capturing trips coming from the north towards Civic and from the south heading towards Gungahlin. It does not capture trips coming from Belconnen. The data can be viewed online in real time at: http://macarthuravedisplay.visio-tools.com/ Between December 2017 and May 2019, the barometer counted over 710,000 cyclists (Figure 29). March followed by October had the highest number of cyclists. There is a clear seasonal variation in the number of cyclists with winter and summer having the lowest counts, although this is not significant. This suggests that climatic conditions may have an impact on cycling numbers, particularly for days of high temperature, rainfall and wind. Of particular interest is the impact of extreme temperatures given the increase in hotter days due to climate change. During such weather, cyclists may benefit from planning decisions that increase thermal comfort such as shading, material choices or location away from infrastructure that increases urban heat effects. The data also showed that cycling is highest from Tuesday to Thursday and lowest on Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays suggesting that most of the trips recorded are for work and education. 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 Count (both directions) May-19 Apr-19 Mar-19 Feb-19 Jan-19 Dec-18 Nov-18 Oct-18 Sep-18 Aug-18 Jul-18 Jun-18 May-18 Apr-18 Mar-18 Feb-18 Jan-18 Dec-17 Count (both directions) Quarterly averages Figure 29: Bike barometer counts, December 2017 to May 2019. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and City Services 156 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator HS5: Water resources Water resources and consumption This section examines the availability of water resources and the consumption of potable water in the ACT. For information on aquatic ecosystem health, water quality and river flows see section 5.6 Water. Whilst some groundwater is used in the ACT for non-potable water supply, it is a small resource compared with surface water, and current use does not represent a risk to groundwater resources. Therefore, the use and availability of groundwater resources is not included in this section. Water underpins almost every aspect of life and is a vital component for human health and wellbeing as well as the health of the ACT’s landscapes and urban environments. The availability of water is key for residential supply, commercial and industrial activities, and agriculture. Water availability is also essential for supporting the ACT region’s population growth. The availability of water resources is largely determined by the spatial and temporal variability of rainfall, temperature and evaporation, as well as impacts of land use on catchment hydrology. Stream flows in the ACT are highly variable, with drier conditions punctuated by wet years that replenish water storages and river systems. Extended dry periods, such as the Millennium Drought, can lead to severely reduced surface water flows and storage levels in the ACT. While such conditions may necessitate restrictions on water use, it is important that water is used sustainably at all times to ensure secure levels of water resources prior to dry periods. In response to the Millennium Drought, the ACT Government enlarged the Cotter Dam to increase water storage capacity for long-term droughts. Climate change is predicted to increase the frequency and severity of droughts and will have consequences for the ACT’s water resources in the future (see section 5.1 Climate Change). Water consumption is determined by a range of factors including population, urban densification, changes in household usage, restrictions on use due to water availability, changes in demand due to rainfall, and water use by commercial, industrial and agricultural sectors (within consumptive entitlements). Water reuse and recycling, both by households and larger users reduces the need to harvest water from the natural environment. In addition, the volume of wastewater that the community produces is relatively stable, so recycling provides a reliable source of water. Point Hut Crossing, Murrumbidgee River. Source: Ryan Colley. 157 5.2 Human settlements © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY ACT’S URBAN WATER SUPPLY The ACT draws water from three separate catchments (Figure 30): • the Cotter River Catchment and its three reservoirs Cotter, Bendora and Corin. • the Queanbeyan River Catchment which supplies Googong Dam in New South Wales (NSW). • the Murrumbidgee River Catchment, via the Cotter Pumping Station and the Murrumbidgee to Googong water transfer. Water storages in the ACT have a combined capacity of 278 gigalitres. This includes the Corin (70.8 gigalitres), Bendora (11.4 gigalitres) and Cotter (76.2 gigalitres) storage reservoirs on the Cotter River and the Googong (119.4 gigalitres) storage reservoir on the Queanbeyan River. The Googong reservoir is the largest water supply reservoir and represents 43% of the ACT’s storage capacity. The ACT sources water from each catchment depending on water availability, water quality, ability to meet demand, operational cost and infrastructure performance. Corin and Bendora reservoirs are the cheapest sources of water in the ACT due to their gravity-fed supply to the Stromlo water treatment plant and cleaner water requiring less treatment. Water can also be sourced come from: • Googong Reservoir: this is more expensive because the Googong water treatment plant is supplied from Googong Reservoir via pumps and the water quality from this rural catchment is not as good and requires more expensive treatment. • Cotter Reservoir: pumping from the Cotter Dam to the Stromlo water treatment plant requires water to be moved to a higher elevation, resulting in higher pumping costs than Googong. • Water can be pumped from the Murrumbidgee River to Googong Reservoir, but the combination of pumping and treating the poorer water quality from the Murrumbidgee River means that higher costs are incurred. The use of various water sources in 2018 demonstrates the flexibility of the ACT’s water supply. In response to significantly low rainfall in that year, Cotter Reservoir was used as the main source of supply and was supplemented by Bendora and Googong. 158 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 30: The ACT’s water supply network Source: Icon Water 159 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Water storage volume trends for the 2015–2019 period are presented below. Volumes are determined by inflows from rainfall, evaporation, the volume of water consumed, and spills and releases for environmental flows. This means that changes in the storage volumes of individual reservoirs will be highly variable, regardless of inflows. This is particularly the case for the Cotter catchment reservoirs which are generally the main sources for ACT’s water. For example, during 2018–19, the Cotter catchment reservoirs provided 78% of the water supplied to the ACT and Queanbeyan, of which Bendora reservoir contributed 29% and the Cotter reservoir 49%. Over the reporting period (2015 to 2019), storage volumes were variable for all ACT reservoirs in response to annual changes to inflows and water use (Figure 31). However, by June 2019 all reservoirs were at their lowest levels over the 5-year period: • Corin reservoir fell to 24% (17 gigalitres) of capacity from a reporting period high of 62% in June 2017. • Bendora reservoir fell to 44% (5.0 gigalitres) of capacity from a reporting period high of 92% in June 2015 and 79% in 2018. Bendora has the lowest total capacity of all the ACT’s reservoirs and shows greater variation in response to inflow and outflow changes. 18 Source: Icon Water • Googong reservoir fell to 61% (73 gigalitres) of capacity from a report period high of 100% in June 2015 and 2016, and • Cotter reservoir retained the highest volume, only falling to 82% (62 gigalitres) of capacity from a reporting period high of 98% in June 2017 and 2018. At the end of June 2019, the ACT’s four reservoirs were holding 57% (157 gigalitres) of the total ACT storage capacity (Figure 32). The enlargement of the Cotter Dam in 2013 increased the ACT’s water storage by 72 gigalitres. In the absence of this increase, the combined ACT storages would have been around 30% of their total capacity – similar to levels during the Millennium Drought. The water storage volumes between 2015 and 2019 are consistent with a long-term trend in reduced storage inflows. Available water resources have declined significantly in the past 20 years, with mean storage volumes 41% below the long-term average.18 The total inflows to the ACT’s four drinking supply reservoirs from 2001–02 to 2018–19 are shown in Figure 33. For all but two years (2010–11 and 2011–12), inflows were below the long-term average. The total inflows during 2018–19 were 32 gigalitres, the lowest since records began in 1912, and 86% below the long-term average (228 gigalitres). 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% June 2019 June 2018 June 2017 June 2016 June 2015 % of storage capacity Corin Bendora Cotter Googong Figure 31: Percentage of storage capacity for ACT reservoirs, June 2015 to June 2019. Data sourced from: Icon Water 160 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 June 2019 June 2018 June 2017 June 2016 June 2015 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% June 2019 June 2018 June 2017 June 2016 June 2015 Combined storage volume (GL) % total ACT accessible water storage Corin Bendora Cotter Googong % total accessible water storage Figure 32: Total storage volumes for ACT reservoirs, June 2015 to June 2019. Data sourced from: Icon Water 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 2001–02 Gigalitres Total inflows Long term average 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 2001–02 Figure 33: Total inflows to the ACT’s four water storage reservoirs, 2001–02 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Icon Water 161 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Wastewater recycling The Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre (LMWQCC) non-drinking water scheme is the primary supply of non-drinking water in the ACT. Between 2009–10 and 2018–19, there was little variation in the ACT’s wastewater recycling with volumes remaining around 4,000 megalitres to 4,500 megalitres (Figure 34). This represented around 12% to 17% of the ACT’s total wastewater produced. The remaining treated wastewater from LMWQCC is either reused at the plant or is discharged into the Molonglo River providing environmental flows, protecting riverine ecosystems and providing for downstream use. Wastewater recycling is largely dependent on the annual demand for such water and can also be affected by periods of high rainfall which can reduce the need for recycled water. There is currently low demand for recycled water in the ACT; however, if drought conditions continue, there may be a growing need for recycled water. 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 5,000 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 Volume of recycled water supplied (ML) % of total wastewater recycled Volume of recycled water supplied (ML) % of total wastewater recycled Figure 34: Wastewater recycling in the ACT, 2009–10 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Icon Water 162 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator HS6: Water consumption 19 Source: Icon Water 20 Non-residential usage includes the commercial and industrial sectors, city parks, hospitals and schools, and government buildings. Potable water consumption in the ACT and Queanbeyan has remained fairly consistent since 2012–13, at around 50,000 megalitres per year (Figure 35). This consistent use has remained despite population growth in the ACT of around 1.7% per year. However, usage in 2017–18 was 54,000 megalitres, the highest volume over the past 10 years. This increase has been driven by hotter and drier weather conditions and is not considered indicative of an increasing trend in water usage. The consistency in total annual water use since 2012–13 has occurred due to a decrease in per capita water use (Figure 36). Between 2001–02 and 2017–18, per capita water use dropped from 124 kilolitres per year, to 78 kilolitres per year, a decrease of around 37%. Although there are annual variations in annual per capita water use, the level has remained between 70 to 80 kilolitres per year since 2007–08. Reasons for the decrease in per capita consumption include: • a significant cultural shift regarding attitudes to saving water in response to the Millennium Drought • changes in landscaping to reduce irrigation • the community understands and supports the importance of water conservation • reduction in irrigated areas – smaller block sizes, larger houses and reduced outdoor space, less irrigation of playing fields and urban open spaces • the shift towards urban densification has seen a transition away from freestanding single residential homes, which often have a garden • water-sensitive urban design in buildings and developments • water-efficient appliances and fittings, and • the use of grey and rain water for irrigation has increased significantly.19 The ACT uses over 90% of the supplied water, with Queanbeyan using around 8% annually. Residential supply is responsible for most water use in the ACT, accounting for around 60% of the total supplied annually, which has remained consistent since 2008–09 (Figure 35). This means that most gains in water use efficiency can be made at the household level. Non-residential uses typically accounted for between 20% and 25% of the total water supplied annually.20 Cotter Dam. Source: OCSE. 163 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 Residential Volume supplied (ML) Non-residential Other Supplied to Queanbeyan Figure 35: Water consumption in the ACT by user, 2008–09 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Icon Water Notes: Non-residential users include the commercial and industrial sectors, hospitals and schools, city parks, and government buildings. Other includes non-potable water, raw water, leakage, and the North Canberra Effluent Reuse Scheme 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 2001–02 Annual water consumption (kilolitres per person) 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 2010–11 2009–10 2008–09 2007–08 2006–07 2005–06 2004–05 2003–04 2002–03 2001–02 Figure 36: Annual per capita water use in the ACT, 2001–02 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Icon Water 164 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY WATER SENSITIVE URBAN DESIGN Supplied by Transport Canberra and City Services Canberra is the largest city in the Murray–Darling Basin. Recent water quality issues in Canberra’s lakes and waterways have reinforced the need for a more coordinated and improved approach to managing catchments in the ACT. Population growth, climate change, ageing infrastructure and residential development all increase the pressure on the Territory’s water demand and water quality. The ACT Government has been incorporating new or retro-fitted wetlands and ponds across the urban landscape. Wetlands and ponds create aquatic habitat for plants and animals, and improve water quality by removing nutrients and other pollutants from urban waterways. They also improve flood protection and capture stormwater for irrigating urban green spaces. Wetlands and ponds also provide many social benefits such as places for recreation and volunteering, and opportunities for education. Together with other water-sensitive design measures, such as rainwater tanks, rain gardens and permeable paving, wetlands and ponds help slow down stormwater flows. This helps to retain and absorb more water into the landscape, recharge the groundwater system and protect downstream ecological systems. Water-sensitive urban design measures can support more streetscape vegetation to help mitigate the urban heat island effect and cool the landscape on hot summer days. More water-efficient household appliances, rainwater tanks and stormwater harvesting can reduce demand on our drinking water supplies and improve our water security for future droughts. Sullivans Creek and Inner North Reticulation Network The Sullivans Creek and Inner North Reticulation Network is a practical example of integrated water cycle management and water-sensitive urban design principles in action in Canberra. It is Canberra’s first neighbourhood-scale stormwater harvesting and managed aquifer recharge system. The scheme captures and treats urban stormwater in constructed wetlands, before pumping though a reticulation network for irrigation of urban green spaces. The scheme also includes managed aquifer recharge, which involves storing filtered stormwater in an underground aquifer during wetter periods for later retrieval and use during the peak irrigation season. The scheme’s infrastructure includes pipelines, pump stations, filtration systems, flow meters, valves, level sensors, water quality monitoring equipment, bores and a telemetry operation system. The end users have constructed tanks to receive and store the water before pumping it into their irrigation systems. The Sullivans Creek and Inner North Reticulation Network is expected to deliver significant environmental, social and economic benefits, including: • Protecting Lake Burley Griffin – Removing nutrient-rich stormwater from Sullivans Creek and using it for irrigation reduces nutrient loads and algal blooms in Lake Burley Griffin. – Reducing the stormwater flows into Sullivans Creek, thereby improving the regulation of inflows to Lake Burley Griffin. • Reducing demands on our precious potable drinking water supply – Substituting high-quality drinking water currently used for irrigation with fit-for-purpose stormwater. – Improving the efficiency of water use for irrigators. • Reliable stormwater supply and reduced costs of water – Storing filtered stormwater in an aquifer during cooler months replenishes the groundwater system and enables use during the peak irrigation season in the summer months. – Providing stormwater for irrigating urban green spaces provides a cheaper source of water compared to drinking water. The nutrients in stormwater can also represent a valuable resource for irrigation use, reducing the requirement for fertiliser. The Sullivans Creek and Inner North Reticulation Network will be evaluated over a five-year trial period to inform future decisions regarding water-sensitive urban design, integrated water cycle management and the further potential for stormwater harvesting in the ACT. 165 5.2 Human settlements.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report N MAP IS INDICATIVE ONLY 200m SANFORD ST HOSKINS ST MORISSET RD PHILLIP AVE FEDERAL HWY MADIGAN ST MAJURA AVE WAKEFIELD AVE ANTILL ST MOUAT ST WATTLE ST MACARTHUR AVE BRIGALOW S T NORTHBOURNE AVE BARTON HWY ELLENBOROUGH ST CO WP ER S T FLEMIN GT O N R D MITCHELL WATSON KENNY DOWNER HACKETT DICKSON AINSLIE O’CONNOR LYNEHAM SULLIVANS CREEK FLEMINGTON RD POND 1 FLEMINGTON RD POND 2 LYNEHAM POND DICKSON POND Gungahlin Cemetery Norwood Park Crematorium Canberra Racecourse EPIC Kamberra Wines Yowani Country Club Southwell Park National Hockey Centre Brindabella Christian College Lyneham Primary School Lyneham High School Lyneham Neighbourhood Oval Downer Neighbourhood Oval Dickson District Playing Fields Dickson College North Ainslie Primary School Emmaus Christian School Daramalan College Ainslie Football Club Hackett Neighbourhood Oval Major Stormwater Channel Stormwater Reticulation Network Pond Pump Storage Tank Bore - Injection/Abstraction Irrigated Site Possible Irrigated Site Figure 37: Inner North Stormwater Reticulation Network Source: Transport Canberra and City Services 166 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA GAPS Energy • Data on the ACT’s energy use is not sufficient to enable a comprehensive assessment of the ACT’s energy generation and consumption. This includes a lack of data on energy consumption for fuel types other than for electricity, and the consumption of energy by sector. Waste • Data is required on the level of resource recovery for each waste sector. • Data is currently unavailable for the amount and type of waste exported to other jurisdictions. • There is incomplete reporting of waste managed by waste industry participants operating within the ACT. This is because current regulatory arrangements do not require complete reporting – only voluntary reporting arrangements are in place. • The lack of comprehensive and consistent waste data makes it difficult to assess waste trends in the ACT. This has implications for the review of current policy effectiveness and the development of future policies, programs and infrastructure. • Changes to regulatory arrangements to ensure tracking of waste through to its final destination and to implement mandatory reporting need to be developed to achieve the required quality of data. Urban development with rooftop solar panels. Source: Ryan Colley 167 5.2 Human settlements © Ryan Colley.
5.3 AIR 168 © Ryan Colley 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
Section contents Indicator assessment 171 Key actions 172 Main findings 172 Introduction 173 Air quality 173 Data trends 174 Indicator A1: Compliance with air quality standards 174 Indicator A2: Health impacts of air pollution 179 Indicator A3: Emissions of major air pollutants 180 Indicator A4: Amenity 180 Data gaps 181 169 5.3 Air.
All levels of air pollution are associated with adverse health effects is a significant problem, responsible for 80% of complaints to the EPA over the 2017–18 and 2018–19 period is the most serious air quality issue in the ACT exceedances of air quality standards for CO, NO2 and ozone wood heaters have the greatest impact on ACT’s air quality transport emissions are responsible for most of the year round ambient air pollution controlled burns, bushfires and dust storms impact on air quality and are likely to increase with climate change Air quality in the ACT 2015–18 PM2.5 NOISE exceedances of the air quality standard for PM2.5 31 exceedances in the Tuggeranong Valley 28 CO NO2 O3 exceedances from wood heater smoke 24 ZERO ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 170 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality A1: Compliance with air quality standards With the exception of particulate matter (PM2.5) air quality levels were compliant with the with National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure standards. PM2.5 remains a concern for the Tuggeranong Valley, particularly given the current consensus that there is no safe concentration of particles for sensitive people. Smoke from wood heaters is the main cause of PM2.5 exceedances in the ACT. Fair     High A2: Health impacts of air pollution There is currently no data available on the impacts of air pollution on human health in the ACT, nor the associated costs to the health system and the economy. Current expert and research consensus suggests that air pollution, even at concentrations below the current air quality standards, is associated with adverse health effects. Unknown     Low A3: Emissions of major air pollutants Data on the sources and emissions of diffuse source air pollution, which make up the majority of emissions in the ACT, has not been updated since 1999. In the absence of current data it is not possible to assess changes in air pollution emissions over the reporting period. The ACT’s annual monitoring and reporting activities for point source (industry) emissions complied with the National Environment Protection National Pollutant Inventory Measure over the reporting period. Unknown     Low A4: Amenity Over the 2017–18 and 2018–19 periods, the EPA received 5,562 environmental complaints. Concerns about noise were responsible for 80% of all complaints and is clearly a significant issue for the ACT community. Amplified noise was the source of most noise complaints. Air pollution received the second highest number of complaints (13%), with smoke the source of most complaints. With only 2 years of data available, it is not possible to assess trends over the reporting period. Unknown     Low Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 171 5.3 Air.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: continue to promote the replacement of wood heaters, particularly in the Tuggeranong Valley. ACTION 2: increase the community’s uptake of pubic and active transport to reduce private vehicle emissions. ACTION 3: increase the number of National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure compliant air quality monitoring stations to improve the assessment of localised air pollution issues. ACTION 4: improve knowledge of the impacts of air pollution on human health and associated costs to the health system and economy. ACTION 5: undertake an assessment of air pollutant emissions from diffuse sources to update the National Pollutant Inventory data from 1999. Main findings Air quality over the reporting period (2015 to 2018) PM2.5 is the most serious air quality issue for the ACT with levels that are likely to have health implications for sensitive individuals. Over the reporting period, there were 31 exceedances of the daily National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure (AAQ NEPM) standard for PM2.5. The Monash station accounted for 28 of the exceedances. Exceedance results show that PM2.5 pollution is far more likely in the Tuggeranong Valley. Smoke from wood heaters accounted for 23 (82%) of Monash station exceedances. For the Florey station, there was one exceedance due to wood heaters. All other exceedances were caused by controlled burns and dust storms. High PM2.5 levels and annual variations are likely due to the occurrence of calm autumn and winter days which increase the accumulation of urban pollution from wood heaters. The replacement of wood heaters with energy-efficient electric heating is critical to improve air quality in the ACT, particularly in the Tuggeranong Valley. Over the reporting period, there were no exceedances of AAQ NEPM standards for Carbon Monoxide (CO), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3) and particulate matter less than 10 micrometres in size (PM10). Dust storms, controlled burns and bushfires will continue to cause deterioration in air quality in the ACT. These will vary from year to year depending on weather conditions. Climate change is likely to increase the frequency and severity of smoke and dust impacts on air quality, and increased ozone formation. Health impacts of air pollution There is currently no data available on the impacts of air pollution on human health in the ACT, nor the associated costs to the health system and the economy. Current expert and research consensus suggests that air pollution, even at concentrations below the current air quality standards, is associated with adverse health effects. In recognition of health impact evidence, national standards are moving towards the position that there is no safe concentration for sensitive people, especially for particles (PM10, PM2.5). Any reduction in air pollution will result in health benefits, even where pollutant concentrations are within the air quality standards. Emissions of air pollutants Data on the sources and emissions of diffuse source air pollution has not been updated since 1999. In the absence of current data it is not possible to assess changes in air pollution emissions over the reporting period. Diffuse sources of air pollutants, especially from transport and wood heaters, are known to be the main contributors to air pollution in the ACT. The monitoring and reporting of point source emissions is required under the National Environment Protection National Pollutant Inventory Measure (NPI NEPM). The ACT’s monitoring and reporting activities complied with the NPI NEPM over the reporting period (2015 to 2018). Amenity Over the 2017–18 and 2018–19 period, the ACT Environment Protection Authority (EPA) received 5,562 environmental complaints. Noise issues were responsible for 80% of all complaints and is clearly a significant problem for the ACT community. 172 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION This section provides an assessment of air quality, the impacts of air pollution on human health, the sources and emissions of air pollutants, and amenity. The following indicators are assessed: • A1: Compliance with air quality standards • A2: Health impacts of air pollution • A3: Emissions of major air pollutants • A4: Amenity For the emissions of greenhouse gases see section 5.1 Climate change. Air quality Air quality is one of the most tangible indicators of the state of our local environment, and directly affects human health and wellbeing. If air pollutants reach high enough concentrations, they can endanger human health and the environment. Clean air is associated with better physical and mental health, longer life and 1 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2018, National Health Survey: First Results, 2017–18, ABS cat. no. 4364.0.55.001, Canberra. significant financial savings from reduced health-care expenses and work absences. Clean air is also essential for biodiversity and ecosystem health. The sources of air pollution in the ACT and their impacts on health are shown in Figure 1. Currently, the main sources of air pollution in Canberra are wood heaters, motor vehicles (especially diesel exhaust), wind-blown dust, bushfires, planned burning activities and industry. Everyday choices, such as driving cars and burning wood for domestic heating, can have a significant impact on air quality. Air quality is primarily of concern in areas with high concentrations of population, transport and industrial activities. Such areas can experience localised air quality problems which have the potential to cause adverse health impacts. Higher temperatures and reduced rainfall associated with climate change is likely to increase the impact of smoke and dust on air quality. Planned burning measures to reduce the severity of bushfires is also likely to increase smoke impacts. In addition, higher temperatures are likely to increase ozone formation. Pollen concentrations are also a challenge in the ACT, which was reported to have the highest rate of allergic rhinitis in Australia (29% of the population) in 2017–18. 1 For more information see the Health impacts of pollen and spores case study at the end of the Air section. Decreased lung function and respiratory disease SOURCES IMPACTS Motor vehicles Carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter (PM10 and PM25) Headaches and tiredness Impaired mental and physical performance Eye and throat irritation Asthma attacks Cardiovascular disease Anxiety and depression Low birth weight Wood heaters, bushfires and planned burns Carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter (PM10 and PM25) Industry Carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter (PM10 and PM25) Airborne dust Particulate matter (PM10 and PM25) Urban development Particulate matter (PM10 and PM25) Ozone Atmospheric reactions involving nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons and solar radiation Figure 1: Sources of air pollution and impacts on human health 173 5.3 Air.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Amenity Amenity refers to environmental nuisance, such as the occurrence of noise, smoke, dust, light and pollution incidents. These can interfere with daily activities and the quality of life by impacting on the quiet enjoyment of households (for example, the ability to sleep, study, relax and use outdoor space) and use of recreational areas. Impacts on amenity can have significant health consequences such as sleep deprivation, as well as economic consequences such as the ability to work. Identification of deterioration in amenity comes from community complaints received by the ACT government. The number of complaints is dependent on a range of factors such as the sensitivity of community members to particular issues, and the number of complaints made about each individual event. Consequently, it is difficult to assess trends in amenity. Despite this, complaints data does provide information on the everyday environment concerns of the ACT community. DATA TRENDS Indicator A1: Compliance with air quality standards Measuring air quality in the ACT The ACT’s air quality monitoring network has only two National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure (AAQ NEPM) compliant monitoring stations at Monash and Florey. The Monash station is situated in the Tuggeranong Valley, the Florey station in Belconnen (Figure 2). A third station at Civic does not satisfy AAQ NEPM compliance requirements and is not reported here. The Florey station was established in February 2014 to comply with AAQ NEPM monitoring requirements for the ACT’s growing population. The National Environment Protection Council (NEPC) sets ambient air quality reporting standards and goals through the AAQ NEPM. This AAQ NEPM prescribes targets for pollutants in ambient air, as well as the methods that should be used to monitor the pollutants. The ACT EPA reports annually against the AAQ NEPM standards and goals. Compliance with the AAQ NEPM standards ensures that the ACT is achieving the national environment protection standards for ambient air quality and that monitoring of AAQ NEPM pollutants is being undertaken appropriately. 2 The PM2.5 standard came into effect in February 2016. Before this date, the PM2.5 standard was advisory only. 3 Environment Protection Authority, 2019, ACT Air Quality Report 2018, ACT Government, Canberra. Florey Civic Monash Figure 2: Air quality monitoring stations in the ACT. Data sourced from: ACT Health Directorate The pollutants included in the AAQ NEPM are: • carbon monoxide (CO) • lead • nitrogen dioxide (NO2) • ozone • sulfur dioxide • particulate matter less than 10 micrometres in size (PM10) • particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometres in size (PM2.5).2 The ACT monitors the levels of CO, NO2, ozone, PM10 and PM2.5 in ambient air. The ACT does not monitor sulfur dioxide due to the lack of heavy industry in the region, and lead levels have not been monitored since the phase-out of leaded petrol in 2002. To comply with the AAQ NEPM, the ACT Government must demonstrate that air quality meets the specified standards (Table 1). For PM10, the ACT Government has set a lower annual standard of 20 μg/m3, as opposed to the NEPM standard of 25 μg/m3. Poor air quality arising from fire (both unplanned and controlled burns), or pollution events such as dust storms, are excluded from AAQ NEPM compliance assessments. Information on air quality monitoring and annual results can be found in the ACT Air Quality Reports.3 174 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Table 1: National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure standards and goals Pollutant Averaging Period Maximum concentration Maximum allowable exceedances Carbon monoxide 8 hours 9.0 ppm 1 day a year Nitrogen dioxide 1 hour 0.12 ppm 1 day a year 1 year 0.03 ppm None Photochemical oxidants (as ozone) 1 hour 0.10 ppm 1 day a year 4 hours 0.08 ppm 1 day a year Particles as PM10 1 day 50 μg/m3 None 1 year 25 μg/m3 None Particles as PM2.5 1 day 25 μg/m3 None 1 year 8 μg/m3 None Notes: μg/m3 = micrograms per cubic metre; PM2.5 = particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometres; PM10 = particulate matter less than 10 micrometres; ppm = parts per million. Air pollutant levels in the ACT Interpreting the data The concentration of air pollutants depends on several factors, including the rate of emissions, the weather and the topography of the area. For example, wood smoke levels are more pronounced in winter in the Tuggeranong Valley than in other areas of the ACT largely because of the topography of the area. These factors need to be taken into account when interpreting monitoring results. Particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometres in size (PM2.5) PARTICULATE MATTER Smoke from domestic wood heaters, controlled burns and bushfires, are the most significant sources of particulate matter in the ACT. Particle pollution is also produced by industry and motor vehicle emissions. Particle pollution can also result from anthropogenic sources (smoke from wood heaters and controlled burning, motor vehicles – particularly diesel, and industry) and natural sources (dust storms, bushfires and pollen). Particle pollution is usually the community’s main indicator of air quality, as it is often evident as a haze which reduces visibility. Climate change is likely to increase the occurrence of particle pollution with conditions leading to dust storms and more prevalent fires. Particle pollution is the most significant air quality problem in the ACT with high levels associated with respiratory and cardiovascular illness. Current research suggests that there is no level of PM at which health impacts do not occur. The specific effect of a particle on health depends on its size, composition and concentration. Particles are associated with increased respiratory symptoms, aggravation of asthma, increased mortality and hospital admissions for heart and lung diseases. The most common measures of particles are PM10 (particulate matter that is 10 micrometres or less in diameter) and PM2.5 (particulate matter that is 2.5 micrometres or less in diameter). In comparison, a human hair is about 100 micrometres in diameter. Particles smaller than 2.5 micrometres are considered to have more significant health impacts due to their deeper penetration into the lungs. 175 5.3 Air.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Because the PM2.5 standard came into effect in February 2016, all prior exceedances for PM2.5 are for the advisory standard only. However, there is no difference between the previous advisory standard and the current PM2.5 standard, so all annual exceedances are comparable regardless of reporting year. There were 31 exceedances of the daily AAQ NEPM standard for PM2.5 recorded over the reporting period (2015 to 2018). This included: • 28 exceedances for the Monash station – 6 in 2015, 8 in 2016, 12 in 2017, and 2 in 2018 (Figures 3 and 4). • Three for the Florey station – 1 in 2016, 2 in 2018 (Figure 4). These results show that PM2.5 pollution is far more likely in the Tuggeranong Valley. In addition, exceedances have occurred at the Monash station in every year since 2009. For the Monash station between 2015 and 2018, there were 23 exceedances due to smoke from wood heaters, 4 from controlled burns and 1 from a dust storm event (Figure 4). For the Florey station, there was one exceedance due to smoke from wood heaters, one from controlled burning, and one from a dust storm event. Natural events such as dust storms, controlled burns and bushfires, which cannot be controlled through normal air quality management programs, are not included in the assessment of AAQ NEPM standard compliance. Results for annual average PM2.5 levels for the Monash station and the Florey station are both compliant with the AAQ NEPM standard of 8 μg/ m3 (Figure 5). However, the annual average levels recorded for Monash station over the reporting period were between approximately 85% and 96% of the standard. For Florey, annual average levels were between approximately 81% and 93% of the standard. This shows that whilst PM2.5 levels are within the AAQ NEPM standard, they are closer to exceeding the annual standard than for other monitored pollutants. Overall, results show no long-term trends in PM2.5 levels. High levels and annual variations are likely due to the occurrence of calm autumn and winter days which increase the accumulation of urban pollution from wood heaters. It is clear that PM2.5 is the most serious air quality issue for the ACT with levels that are likely to have health implications for sensitive individuals. Impact of wood heaters on air quality The replacement of wood heaters with energy efficient electric heating is critical to improving air quality in the ACT, particularly in the Tuggeranong Valley. Wood heaters were responsible for 82% of the daily PM2.5 exceedances from the Monash station between 2015 and 2018. Seasonal averages for the Monash station clearly show the impact of wood heaters on PM2.5 levels (Figure 6). During the late autumn and winter months, PM2.5 levels were elevated in response to peak wood heater usage. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Maximum concentration Micrograms per cubic metre NEPM standard 50th percentile 75th percentile 95th percentile Figure 3: Daily maximum PM2.5 levels, Monash station, 2009–2018 Data sourced from: ACT Health Directorate 176 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 2018 Florey 2018 Monash 2017 Florey 2017 Monash 2016 Florey 2016 Monash 2015 Florey 2015 Monash Wood heater Number of exceedances (days) Controlled burn Dust storm Figure 4: Number of PM2.5 exceedances by cause, Monash and Florey stations, 2015–2018. Data sourced from: ACT Health Directorate 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Micrograms per cubic metre NEPM standard Florey annual average Monash annual average Figure 5: Annual average PM2.5 levels: Monash station (2009–2018) and Florey station (2014–2018). Data sourced from: ACT Health Directorate 177 5.3 Air.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 December November October September August July June May April March February January 2015 Micrograms per cubic metre 2016 2017 2018 December November October September August July June May April March February January Figure 6: Monthly average daily maximum PM2.5 levels, Monash station, 2009–2018. Data sourced from: ACT Health Directorate Note: High monthly average in April 2016 due to controlled burns. Particulate matter less than 10 micrometres in size (PM10) There were 8 exceedances of the daily AAQ NEPM standards for PM10 recorded during the reporting period. This included 4 exceedances for the Monash station in 2018, and 4 exceedances for the Florey station (1 in 2015 and 3 in 2018). All of the exceedances were due to dust storms. Natural events such as dust storms, controlled burns and bushfires, which cannot be controlled through normal air quality management programs, are not included in the assessment of AAQ NEPM standard compliance. With the exclusion of dust storms, results for PM10 are compliant with the AAQ NEPM standard for both the Monash and Florey stations. Overall, results show no long-term trends in PM10 levels, with events such as dust storms, controlled burns and bushfires responsible for increased levels. Ozone OZONE Ozone is not directly emitted into the air; it is formed when volatile organic compounds (from industry, vehicles and vegetation) and oxides of nitrogen (from industry, vehicles and natural gas use) react in sunlight. These reactions only produce significant amounts of ozone on warm sunny days with light or recirculating winds. Ozone can also form downwind of bushfires when the chemicals in smoke react in the presence of sunlight. In the future, the higher temperatures predicted as a result of climate change are likely to lead to a greater potential for ozone formation. Human exposure to high concentrations of ozone can result in decreased lung function, increases in asthma attacks, and increases in hospital admissions for people with heart and lung conditions. Higher levels of ozone can also affect vegetation growth and ecosystems. 178 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report There were no exceedances of the daily maximum 1-hour and 4-hourly AAQ NEPM standards for ozone recorded during the reporting period for both the Monash and Florey stations. Despite this, 4-hourly maximum levels recorded for Monash station during the reporting period were between approximately 60% and 70% of the standard. Such levels may have health implications for sensitive individuals. Maximum results for the Florey station are also similar, with the exception of 2015 which was lower than Monash. Overall, results show no long-terms trends in ozone levels, with annual variations in maximum concentrations likely due to hazard reduction burns in the region. Carbon monoxide CO CARBON MONOXIDE Carbon monoxide (CO) is mainly produced from vehicle engine exhaust. High levels of CO can affect human health, especially for children, the elderly and those with asthma. Very high levels of CO may cause health problems for birds and animals. CO also plays a role in climate change. Although CO is a weak greenhouse gas, it can affect the concentrations of other stronger greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide and methane. Despite vehicle exhaust being the primary source of CO in the ACT, progressive improvement in motor vehicle emissions has meant that levels of CO have not increased with the growth in traffic over time. There were no exceedances of AAQ NEPM standards for CO recorded during the reporting period for both the Monash station and the Florey station. All levels recorded were well within the compliance range. There was also little difference in CO levels between the stations. Overall, CO levels appear to be slightly declining, likely due to improvements in vehicle emissions which are the main source of CO pollution in the ACT. Nitrogen dioxide NO2 NITROGEN DIOXIDE Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is mainly produced from vehicle engine exhaust. NO2 is also produced by the burning of fuels such as natural gas and diesel. NO2 is harmful to human health, especially for children, the elderly and those with asthma. Low levels of NO2 can irritate the eyes, nose, throat and lungs of humans and animals. Very high levels of NO2 can affect the environment by killing plants and roots, and damaging the leaves of agricultural crops. Very high levels of NO2 can also cause an increase in rain acidity, which can harm ecosystems. Despite vehicle exhaust being the primary source of NO2 in the ACT, progressive improvement in motor vehicle emissions has meant that levels of NO2 have not increased with the growth in traffic over time. There were no exceedances of AAQ NEPM standards for NO2 recorded during the reporting period for either the Monash or Florey stations. All levels recorded were well within the compliance range. There was also little difference in NO2 levels between the stations. Overall, results show that NO2 levels appear to be stable, with some slight annual variations in maximum concentrations. Indicator A2: Health impacts of air pollution There is currently no data available on the impacts of air pollution on human health in the ACT, nor the associated costs to the health system and the economy. At the time of writing this report, the Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment (OCSE) was unable to obtain data on doctor visits and hospital admissions during periods of poor air quality, or data on increases in respiratory and cardiovascular problems associated with periods of poor air quality. Polluted air causes a range of short and long-term negative health outcomes. The common air pollutants present in the ACT – particles, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide and ozone – are all associated with a range of harmful effects on human and environmental health. 179 5.3 Air.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The impacts of air pollution on human health is dependent on a range of factors including exposure level and the age and background health status of individuals. Many people, such as those with chronic respiratory conditions, are at greater risk of experiencing adverse health events when exposed to poor-quality air. Cardiovascular and respiratory complaints are some of the most common effects, with acute cases resulting in increased doctor and hospital visits, and even death in extreme cases. The AAQ NEPM standards are designed to adequately protect human health and wellbeing. However, there is a large body of evidence that demonstrates that air pollution, even at concentrations below the current air quality standards, is associated with adverse health effects.4 The strongest evidence relates to premature mortality and effects on the respiratory and cardiovascular system. Particulate matter is estimated to be the individual pollutant responsible for the largest burden of disease from outdoor pollution. In recognition of the evidence on health impacts, national standards are moving towards the position that there is no safe concentration for sensitive people, especially for particles (PM10, PM2.5). In 2013, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classified outdoor air pollution and particulate matter as carcinogenic to humans.5 Any reduction in air pollution will result in health benefits, even where pollutant concentrations are within the air quality standards. Indicator A3: Emissions of major air pollutants Knowledge on the sources of air pollutants is important for the management of air pollution. The sources and amounts of pollutants emitted into the atmosphere are influenced by many factors including population, economic activity, prosperity, mobility and personal behaviour. Due to the low level of industrial activity in the ACT, air quality is largely determined by activities and conditions in our urban areas. For instance, the number of cars being driven and the use of wood heaters in Canberra’s suburbs are major factors influencing air quality. 4 Environment Protection Authority Victoria, 2018, Air Pollution in Victoria – A Summary of the State of Knowledge, August 2018, Carlton, Victoria. Found at https://www.epa.vic.gov.au/~/media/ Publications/1709.pdf 5 International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2016, IARC Monographs: Outdoor Air Pollution, Volume 109. Found at monographs. iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol109/index.php, accessed August 2019. 6 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2015, ACT State of the Environment Report 2015, ACT Government, Canberra. 7 National Environment Protection Council, 2019, National Environment Protection Council Annual Report 2017–2018, Canberra. Found at www.nepc.gov.au/system/files/resources/afef0a22-b780-41ed-ab10-416162bb201e/files/nepc-annual-report-2016-17.pdf, accessed August 2019. The sources and volumes of emissions of air pollutants in the ACT is reported in the National Pollutant Inventory (NPI). Whilst point source emissions are reported annually, data on the sources and emissions of diffuse source air pollution dates from a single 1999 study. It is important to note that diffuse sources of air pollutants, especially from transport and wood heaters, are the most significant contributors to air pollution in the ACT.6 Consequently, in the absence of current data it is not possible to assess changes in air pollution emissions for this reporting period. National Environment Protection National Pollutant Inventory Measure (NPI NEPM) Point-source emissions are regulated by the ACT Government. Maximum concentration limits are placed on certain substances being emitted from industrial sources; these limits are regulated through the Environment Protection Act 1997. There are several industrial facilities in the ACT that must report to the EPA on their total point-source emissions each year. The annual monitoring and reporting of point source emissions is required under the NPI NEPM. During the reporting period (up to and including 2017–18), the ACT’s monitoring and reporting activities complied with the NPI NEPM.7 Indicator A4: Amenity Impacts on amenity such as increased noise, smoke, odour, dust and other pollution can affect health and wellbeing. Noise is the second most common form of pollution experienced by the community, after air pollution, and is increasing with growth in population, urbanisation and traffic. The Environment Protection Authority is responsible for investigating noise, odour, smoke, dust, light and other pollution complaints, and for enforcing compliance with guidelines in the ACT. As the number of complaints increase, so does the burden on compliance and enforcement resources. Noise can significantly impact on quality of life, community health and can reduce economic performance. Noise can cause disturbance to sleep, interfere with reading and relaxing, and can be a barrier to spending time outdoors. Health impacts from chronic or acute noise include sleep deprivation, 180 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report contribution to heart disease, impaired learning, hypertension, raised blood pressure, and stress. Identification of impacts on amenity come from community complaints received by the ACT government. The number of complaints are dependent on a range of factors such as the sensitivity of community members to particular issues, and the number of complaints made about each individual event. Consequently it is difficult to assess trends in amenity. Despite this, complaints data does provide information on everyday environment impacts concerning the ACT community. Complaints data is only available for the 2017–18 and 2018–19 period. Data for these years have been combined to determine the problems impacting on the community. Over the two years a total of 5,562 complaints were received by the EPA regarding environmental conditions. Noise was responsible for 80% of complaints (4,459), with air pollution responsible for 13% (Figure 7). Noise is clearly a significant concern in the ACT. Although air pollution is the second most common complaint, the EPA only received 727 complaints, significantly fewer than for noise. Noise complaints were dominated by amplified noise (mostly loud music) which accounted for 53% (2,364) of the total noise complaints over this two year reporting period. Construction noise accounted for 20% of the total noise complaints. Air pollution complaints were dominated by smoke (wood heaters and controlled burns) which accounted for 55% (403) of the total air pollution complaints over 2017–18 and 2018–19. Odour accounted for 22%, and dust 18%. Light pollution 99 complaints (2%) Land contamination 105 complaints (2%) Waterways pollution 163 complaints (3%) Air pollution 727 complaints (13%) 5,562 Total complaints Noise pollution 4459 complaints (80%) Figure 7: Complaints received by the EPA, 2017–2018 to 2018–2019. Data sourced from: ACT Environment Protection Authority DATA GAPS The ACT air quality monitoring network consists of only two AAQ NEPM monitoring stations at Monash and Florey. The third station at Civic does not satisfy AAQ NEPM compliance requirements. For a comprehensive assessment of air quality in the ACT, a wider monitoring coverage is required. This would assist the detection of localised air pollution related to differing topography, road traffic and levels of industry and land development. For example, differences in local air pollution levels are clearly demonstrated in the number of particulate matter (PM2.5) exceedances recorded at the Monash station when compared to the Florey station. Information is lacking on the human health impacts of air pollution and associated costs to the health system and economy in the ACT. There has been no diffuse air pollution assessment since 1999. Consequently, in the absence of current data it is not possible to assess this indicator for this reporting period. 181 5.3 Air.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY HEALTH IMPACTS OF POLLEN AND SPORES Supplied by: Simon G. Haberle, Ben Keaney, Victoria Miller, Janelle Stevenson, Feli Hopf and Susan Rule, The Australian National University. 8 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2018, National Health Survey: First Results, 2017–18, ABS cat. no. 4364.0.55.001, Canberra. 9 Haberle S.G., 25/9/2014, Canberra Pollen Count and Forecast website, found at www.canberrapollen.com.au/news-events/video-explaining-new-canberra-pollen-app-anuchannel/, accessed August 2019. 10 Pritchard J., J. Stevenson, A. Zawadski, 2019, ‘Increasingly Allergenic Airborne Pollen Revealed in Sediment of Lake Burley Griffin, Canberra’, Journal of Urban Ecology, 5(1):1–14. 11 D’Amato G., S.T. Holgate, R. Pawankar et al., 2015, ‘Meteorological Conditions, Climate Change, New Emerging Factors, and Asthma and Related Allergic Disorders. A statement of the World Allergy Organization’, World Allergy Organization Journal, 8(1):25. 12 Haberle S.G., D.M.J.S. Bowman, R.M. Newnham et al., 2014, ‘The Macroecology of Airborne Pollen in Australian and New Zealand Urban Areas’, PLoS ONE, 9(5). 13 Find out more at www.airrater.org.au and www.canberrapollen.com.au and on Twitter @AirRaterUTAS and @CanberraPollen. The ACT has the highest rate of allergic rhinitis in Australia (29% of the ACT population), increasing by around 10% between 2007 and 2018.8 The geography and climate of Canberra has a lot to do with its status as the nation’s number one hotspot for hay fever. Its land-locked location in the heart of a rich agricultural region, plus a climate and urban landscaping history that supports a high diversity of introduced plants, means that there is little chance for relief during the months when allergy-related plants produce pollen. The Canberra Pollen Calendar The Canberra Pollen Calendar (Figure 8) shows the duration and peak periods of the pollen season for the top allergenic plants in the ACT. Although there is a strong correlation between the amount of grass pollen and people suffering from allergic rhinitis during the spring and summer flowering season (late September to February), there are also many other pollen types that trigger allergic reactions.9 The calendar shows that the actual season for Canberra’s pollen–related allergic rhinitis extends well beyond the limits of the grass season. There is also a clear trend in increasingly allergenic airborne pollen load over the past 90 years, coinciding with Canberra’s urban development and associated tree-planting scheme.10 As the climate warms and the population grows in Canberra, it will be important for allergic rhinitis sufferers, health experts and city landscape planners to be aware of the potential impact that environmental change can have on allergic diseases. Education and awareness about the impacts of allergy causing plants on population health and productivity will help to better guide decisions on reducing health impacts from pollen. Future impacts and management Predicting how pollen seasons might change in the future is difficult due to our limited understanding of the interaction between climate, pollen production and people. Climate change is likely to affect the onset, duration, and intensity of the pollen season, as well as the allergenicity of the pollen. Studies on plant responses to elevated atmospheric levels of Carbon Dioxide indicate that plants exhibit enhanced photosynthesis and reproductive effects and produce more pollen.11 In 2007, the Canberra Pollen Count and Forecast Project was established at the Australian National University by a team of pollen experts (palynologists).12 The aim of the program is to develop a long-term record of airborne pollen in the city and enhance the understanding of the impact of pollen-related allergic rhinitis on the local community. This is being achieved through the development of a citizen science approach designed to provide the public with daily pollen information, while allowing users to give feedback on their hay fever symptoms. This information is providing the first insights into the impact of airborne pollen on people in the ACT (AirRater and CanberraPollen).13 By increasing the data available for research, and the general public’s awareness of the impacts of different pollen types on population health and wellbeing, we can help to understand and begin to mitigate an increasingly significant health and economic burden in the ACT. This will lead to reduced allergy symptoms, improved quality of life, and will empower sufferers to self-manage their condition. An important step will be to increase the monitoring of airborne particles across the urban landscape of the ACT. There is currently only one central monitoring station for pollen in the ACT.
 The addition of more stations across the urban area would greatly improve the understanding of pollen levels and impacts on health across the ACT. 182 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY Peak pollen period Pollen season # Native species Total pollen load (grains/m3) Privet (Ligustrum) Plantain (Plantago) Dock, Sorrel (Rumex) Grass (Poaceae) Paterson’s Curse ( Echium) Oak ( Quercus) Olive ( Olea) Plane tree (Platanus) Willow (Salix) Elm (Ulmus) Birch (Betula) Ash (Fraxinus) Poplar (Populus) #Wattle (Acacia) Pine (Pinus) #She Oak (Casuarinaceae) Cypress Pine (Cupressacaeae) Alder (Alnus) 200 250 150 50 100 0 Average Total Pollen Load (7-day smoothed) Figure 8: Pollen calendar for Canberra and the region based on the Canberra Pollen Monitoring Programs data derived from 2007 and 2014–2019. Source: Canberra Pollen Count and Forecast Project, ANU Notes: The calendar provides a preliminary assessment of the pollen season and peak periods within that season. Some pollen types represent more than one species and can result in more than one peak period in the calendar. The period of highest average total pollen load occurs between September and November in Canberra and the region. 183 5.3 Air.
5.4 LAND 184 © Ryan Colley 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
Section contents Indicator assessment 187 Key actions 188 Main findings 188 Introduction 190 Data trends 191 Indicator L1: Land use change 191 Indicator L2: Land health 201 Data gaps 203 185 5.4 Land.
A – excludes Hobart and Darwin ACT Government target for new housing to be from infill development Greenfield versus infill development 70% average infill rate between 2011–12 and 2017–18 58% predicted increase in urban area by 2041 if the 70% infill target continues to be met 16% all years from 2015–16 to 2017–18 met the infill target Land use in the ACT single dwellings ACT dwelling types 65% 18% 17% medium density high density increase in urban land between 1991 and 2016, compared to a 43% increase in population Urban expansion 57% increase in urban area by 2041 at current urban expansion rates 46% lowest population and residential dwelling density for Australia's major capital citiesA 2nd estimated new dwellings required to accommodate 2041 projected population 100,000 Main land uses of ACT Government land is zoned for natural ecosystems and greenspace Land use 75% conservation and protected 63% plantation forests 4% rural 15% urban and intensive 17% ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 186 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality L1: Land use change Over the reporting period, it was not possible to determine changes in the area of urban and rural lands. However, any changes are estimated to be small. Although nearly 75% of ACT Government land is zoned for natural ecosystems and greenspace, urban expansion continues to be an environmental challenge for the ACT. To minimise urban growth, the proportion of medium and high-density housing is increasing. The rates of infill development are improving with all years from 2015–16 meeting (or close to meeting) the 70% infill target. Fair     Moderate L2: Land health There is a general lack of knowledge about land health in the ACT, both for long-term changes and current conditions. This lack of information does not enable an assessment of land and soil health and remains a critical gap in our understanding of environmental condition. Unknown     Low Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 187 5.4 Land 187 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: improve knowledge on land use change in the ACT. This could be achieved through the development of annual land accounts using the United Nations System of Environmental-Economic Accounting framework. ACTION 2: continue to increase the number of medium and high-density dwellings to minimise future growth in the ACT’s urban area. ACTION 3: encourage and provide opportunities for further increases in urban residential infill developments. ACTION 4: ensure current and future greenfield developments incorporate actions to minimise impacts on natural ecosystems and biodiversity. ACTION 5: improve knowledge on land and soil health to address this critical data gap in environmental condition assessments. Main findings Land use change 2015–16 to 2018–19 It was not possible to determine changes in the area of urban and rural lands. However, any changes are estimated to be small. For land under the tenure of the ACT Government, the main land uses are conservation and protected 63% (141,000 hectares), urban and intensive 17% (37,000 hectares), rural 15% (33,000 hectares), and plantation forests 4% (8,700 hectares). Under the Territory Plan, zoning categories for lands managed by the ACT Government are mountains and bushlands (62%), rural (15%), urban and intensive (9%), hills, ridges and buffers (7%), river corridor (5%), and urban open space 2%. Nearly 75% of ACT Government land is zoned for natural ecosystems and greenspace. In 2019, there were 8,700 hectares of pine plantations in the ACT, although 1,560 hectares were fallow (inactive and unplanted). In 2017–18, 307 hectares were harvested with a value of nearly $5.5 million. ACT’s pine forests are extensively used and managed for recreational activities, including walking, jogging, horse riding and cycling. The ACT has a relatively small agricultural sector with beef cattle farms the most common, accounting for 40% of all farms. The gross value of the ACT’s agriculture in 2017–18 was over $10.6 million. Urban expansion Land development continues to be an environmental challenge for the ACT. Population growth is a key driver of urban land use change. Between 1991 and 2016, the ACT’s urban land area grew by 57%, compared to a population increase of 43% over the same period. If this ratio of urban growth to population continues, the ACT’s current urban footprint would need to increase by a further 46% by 2041 to accommodate projected population growth. It is estimated that the ACT will need 100,000 new dwellings by 2041 to accommodate the projected population growth. Current estimates suggest there is potential for approximately 29,000 new homes in existing greenfield areas zoned as future urban areas. To minimise the growth of the ACT’s future urban footprint there needs be an increase in population density, the number of medium and high-density dwellings, and the amount of urban infill compared to greenfield development. In 2016, Canberra had a population density of 1,062 people per square kilometre, the second lowest of the major Australian capital cities (excluding Hobart and Darwin), and the second lowest residential dwelling density with 437 private dwellings per square kilometre. In 2016, single dwellings were the dominant form of housing accounting for 65% of total residences, 18% were medium density, and 17% high density. The proportionate share of single dwellings has decreased from 80% of total residential dwellings in 1991. 188 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Treescape. Source: Ryan Colley. Greenfield versus infill development The ACT Planning Strategy 2018 sets a target for up to 70% of new housing to be provided as infill development within the existing urban footprint. The rate of infill development in the ACT has varied widely since 2011–12, from a low of 36% of all urban development in 2013–14 to a high of 77% in 2017–18. The average infill rate between 2011–12 and 2017–18 was 58% of all development. The rate of infill urban development has increased since 2013–14, with all years from 2015–16, meeting (or close to meeting) the 70% infill target. If the 70% urban infill target continues to be met, it is estimated that the ACT’s projected 2041 population could be accommodated within a 42,900 hectare footprint, a 16% increase from the 2016 urban area. Land health There is a general lack of knowledge about land health in the ACT, both for long-term changes and current conditions. This lack of information does not enable an assessment of land and soil health and remains a critical gap in our understanding of environmental condition. There is no routine monitoring for soil health indicators such as erosion, salinity, structure decline, and reductions in organic content. Consequently, understanding of the actual extent of these problems is limited. Up to and including 2017–18, monitoring and reporting activities for the ACT’s contaminated sites were found to comply with the National Environment Protection (Assessment of Site Contamination) Measure. 189 5.4 Land © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION This section provides an assessment of land use and condition in the ACT. The following indicators are assessed: • Indicator L1: Land use change • Indicator L2: Land health Human wellbeing as well as terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems are dependent on healthy land. The interactions of soil, air, water, plants, animals and natural processes provide a diverse range of services, including fertile soil for agriculture, clean water production, nutrient recycling, and erosion control. How land is used and managed can significantly affect its capacity to provide these services. Land use is a key driver of environmental change affecting ecological functions, attributes and the integrity of land health. Many environmental problems in the ACT result from current and historic land use and management. The maintenance of land health requires consideration of the needs of urban and other development in conjunction with environmental protection. The main pressures on land health are from vegetation clearing for urban expansion (particularly greenfield development) and agriculture, and severe fire that can expose and alter the structure of soils increasing the risk of significant erosion. The degradation of land has consequences for both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Poor land health can lead to the loss of vegetation and habitat, and severely impact on water quality and aquatic biodiversity (see section 5.6 Water). Poor land health also impacts on agricultural production through the loss of soil nutrients and organic matter, reductions in crop yields and pasture production, and increased erosion. The ACT’s land is used for urban areas, conservation, agriculture and plantation forestry. Land use change can be driven by a range of social, economic and environmental pressures such as population growth, land values that support housing development, preference for traditional housing, and agricultural drivers such as climate (for example, water availability) and commodity prices. Changes in the area of one land use type can have negative consequences for others. For example, urban expansion results in the loss of natural habitat as well as agricultural land. Land use change can also have consequences for a range of other environmental pressures, for example the expansion of urban areas creates increased demand for transport infrastructure such as roads and public transport. This means that urban development can have a greater impact on the environment because of the degree of land change required and the resources consumed. Climate change will increase pressures on land health with higher temperatures, reduced rainfall, more extreme weather events, and an increase in fire risk and severity (see section 5.1 Climate Change and 5.7 Fire). These are likely to affect land use and management through significant changes to landscape functions and vegetation cover. 190 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA TRENDS Indicator L1: Land use change 1 Note that there may be some variation compared to actual land use area due to the amalgamation of categories used and the inclusion of some areas in more than one land use type. 2 ‘Urban and intensive’ includes lands zoned as residential, commercial, industrial, transport, urban open space, and hills/ridges/ buffer areas. For land use change, only urban and rural land uses are discussed here; for changes in conservation areas see section 5.5 Biodiversity. The data used for this indicator are from the Territory Plan Zones. Under the Planning and Development Act 2007, the Territory Plan sets out zoning that identifies the types of land use and activities that are permitted in an area. Because the data are based on land zoning, they may not reflect actual current land use. For example, land zoned for urban areas may still be undeveloped. In addition, land zoning related to specific objectives such as ecological protection, cultural and heritage resources, and environmental integrity (for example, hills, ridges and buffers, mountains and bushland, and river corridors) will differ to conservation and protected areas as shown in section 5.5. Biodiversity because some of this zoned land is under the tenure of rural lease holders and not managed by the ACT Government. The total area of the ACT is around 236,000 hectares and the area of land under the tenure of the ACT Government is around 224,700 hectares. The remainder of the ACT’s land is national land managed by the National Capital Authority (also known as ‘designated land’) and largely includes urban areas around central Canberra and Lake Burley Griffin. For land under the tenure of the ACT Government, the main land uses are (Figures 1 and 2):1 • conservation and protected lands which protect around 141,000 hectares (63%) • urban and intensive lands which account for around 37,000 hectares (17%)2 • rural lands which account for around 33,000 hectares (15%), and • plantation forests which account for around 8,700 hectares (4%). It was not possible to determine changes in the area of urban and rural lands over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19). However, any changes are estimated to be small. Urban and intensive (17%) 224,700 hectares Rural (15%) Conservation and protected (63%) Plantation forest (4%) Figure 1: Main land uses under the tenure of the ACT Government, 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Data is from Territory Plan zones. There may be some variation compared to actual land use area due to the amalgamation of categories used. 191 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 2: Main land use types in the ACT. Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Data is from Territory Plan zones. There may be some variation compared to actual land use area due to the amalgamation of categories used. 192 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Under the Territory Plan, zoning categories for lands managed by the ACT Government are mountains and bushlands (62%), rural (15%), urban and intensive (9%), hills, ridges and buffers (7%), river corridor (5%), and urban open space 2% (Figure 3). This means 3 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2019, ‘Value of Agricultural Commodities Produced, Australia, 2017–18’, (7503.0), Canberra. 4 Plantation forest data from the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 5 The urban land use trends, population and housing projections in this section are taken from: EPSDD, 2018, ACT Planning Strategy 2018, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0007/1285972/2018-ACT-Planning-Strategy.pdf, accessed 13 August 2019. that nearly 75% of ACT Government land is zoned for natural ecosystems and greenspace. Highly modified land uses such as urban and rural account for around 25% of ACT Government land. Urban hills, ridges, buffer areas (7%) River corridor (5%) 224,700 hectares Rural (15%) Mountains and bushland (62%) Urban and intensive (9%) Urban open space (2%) Figure 3: Territory Plan zones for land under the tenure of the ACT Government, 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Data is from Territory Plan zones. There may be some variation compared to actual land use area due to the amalgamation of categories used. Rural and plantation forest land use The ACT has a relatively small agricultural sector. Beef cattle farms are the most common, accounting for 40% of all farms.3 In 2019, there were 8,700 hectares of pine plantations in the ACT, although 1,560 hectares were fallow (inactive and unplanted). Some 10,000 hectares of the pine plantation estate was destroyed in the 2003 bushfires with only the Kowen Forest plantation unburnt. Some burnt plantation areas were replanted with pine trees, particularly where soil stabilisation and water quality protection were a priority, and boundaries were redefined with some areas converted to native vegetation. In 2017–18, 307 hectares were harvested with a value of nearly $5.5 million.4 The pine forests are also extensively used and managed for recreational activities, including walking, jogging, horse riding and cycling. Urban expansion5 Population growth is a key driver of urban land use change in the ACT. The ACT has experienced strong and sustained population growth – in the 10-year period between 2008 and 2018 the population grew by approximately 72,000 people, an average annual increase of 7,200 or 1.7% per year (see section 5.2 Human Settlements). In 2018, the ACT’s population was around 423,000 and is projected to increase to 589,000 people by 2041. The ACT consumes significantly more land for urban development compared to population growth. Between 1991 and 2016, the ACT’s urban land area grew by 57%, compared to a population increase of 43% over the same period. If this ratio of urban growth to population continues, the ACT’s current urban footprint would need to increase by a further 46% by 2041 to accommodate population growth. 193 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report This would mean that the current urban area of around 37,000 hectares would grow to 54,000 hectares. This growth pattern does not support a compact and efficient city and would increase travel times and limit transport options, raise infrastructure-servicing costs, and result in significant increases in the ACT’s ecological footprint. Continued urban expansion also places pressure on Canberra’s rural and greenspace environments, and the connectivity of its ecosystems. It is estimated that the ACT will need 100,000 new dwellings by 2041 to accommodate the projected population growth. This growth will also necessitate the construction of associated infrastructure. The ACT’s growth area is shown in Figure 4. Current estimates suggest there is potential for approximately 29,000 new homes in existing greenfield areas zoned as future urban areas. If no new greenfield areas are identified, this supply is expected to be sufficient until around 2030–40. Figure 4: Current and future urban growth in the ACT. Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 194 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Minimising the growth in the ACT’s urban footprint Much of the growth in the ACT’s urban area has been in the form of single low-density dwellings with fewer and fewer people living in them. To minimise the growth of the ACT’s future urban footprint there needs be an increase in population density, the number of medium and high-density dwellings, and the amount of urban infill compared to greenfield development. The relationship between population density and the growth in urban area is shown in Figure 5. The amount of land required for higher population densities is significantly less than that required for low densities, which reduces the need for new urban areas. Figure 5: Area of land taken by 50,000 dwellings at different population densities. Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 195 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report In 2016, Canberra had a population density of 1,062 people per square kilometre, the second lowest of the major Australian capital cities (excluding Hobart and Darwin). This is due to: • a reduction in Canberra’s household size from 2.9 people in 1991 to 2.5 in 2016 • 55% of ACT households having 2 or fewer people, and • an increase of 125% in single-person households from 1991 to 2016, the fastest growing household type in Canberra. Canberra also had the second lowest residential dwelling density compared to other major Australian capital cities, with 437 private dwellings per square kilometre. Nevertheless, housing preferences are changing, with a greater demand for medium-density housing such as townhouses. In 2016, 18% of Canberra’s residential dwellings were medium density, and 17% high density (Figure 6). Single dwellings remain the dominant form of housing at 65%, although its proportionate share has decreased from 80% of residential dwellings in 1991. Low-density dwellings (65%) 161,916 dwellings Medium-density dwellings (18%) High-density dwellings (17%) Figure 6: Dwelling density in Canberra, 2016. Data sourced from: Australian Bureau of Statistics. Notes: Low density comprises separate houses; Medium density is made up of semi-detached, row or terrace houses, townhouses etc. with one, two or more storeys as well as flats or apartments attached to a house. High density comprises flats or apartments in any number of storied buildings. Only low, medium and high-density residential dwellings are included in the total. 196 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Greenfield versus infill development 6 EPSDD, 2018, ACT Planning Strategy 2018, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0007/1285972/2018-ACT-Planning-Strategy.pdf, accessed 30 November 2019. Greenfield urban development is that which occurs outside the boundary of the established urban area. This development extends the urban footprint and requires the construction of new utility, transport and social infrastructure. Infill urban development is undertaken within the existing urban area and provides greater intensity and efficiency of existing land and infrastructure. Urban infill can include the redevelopment of commercial and industrial areas, and the development of unimproved land within the urban boundaries. Greenfield development places greater pressure on the environment through impacts such as: • vegetation clearance • degraded land condition • increased waterway pollution • increased recreational use and access tracks • garden weed invasion, and • the need for extensive fire management for asset protection. Greenfield development can also significantly increase demand and consumption of resources as well as greenhouse gas emissions through additional infrastructure and transport needs. Another consideration for greenfield developments is the potential requirement for the creation of environmental offsets to address potential development pressures. In the ACT, offsets provide environmental compensation for a development that is likely to have adverse environmental impacts on a protected matter (see section 5.5 Biodiversity). Urban infill generally has a much reduced environmental impact compared to greenfield development because it requires a smaller development footprint and a reduced need for new infrastructure. The benefits can be increased with sensitive design and adoption of low environmental impact types of land use. Higher rates of urban infill are required for the ACT to meet a range of social, environmental and economic needs, including commitments to a net zero emissions future, improved public transport and demographic trends favouring greater housing choice. The ACT Planning Strategy 2018 sets a target for up to 70% of new housing to be provided as infill development within the existing urban footprint.6 The rate of infill development in the ACT has varied widely since 2011–12, from a low of 36% of all urban development in 2013–14 to a high of 77% in 2017–18 (Figure 7). The average infill rate between 2011–12 and 2017–18 was 58% of all development. However, the rate of infill urban development has increased since 2013–14, with all years from 2015–16, meeting (or close to meeting) the 70% infill target. If the 70% urban infill target continues to be met, it is estimated that the ACT’s projected 2041 population could be accommodated within a 42,900 hectare footprint (Figure 8). This would mean a 16% increase from the 2016 urban area compared to a 46% increase if the current ratio of urban growth to population continues. Regardless of the size of urban growth in the future, it is clear that urban land development will continue to be an environmental challenge for the ACT. 197 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Average 2011–12 to 2017–18 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 2013–14 2012–13 2011–12 % of total ACT housing Infill Greenfield Figure 7: Rates of greenfield and infill urban development, 2011–12 to 2017–18. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 2041 urban area if 1991 to 2016 growth levels continue 2041 urban area if 70% infill target met 2016 urban area Urban area (hectares) Figure 8: Estimated urban area required for the ACT’s projected 2041 population (589,000 people) using a 70% urban infill rate compared to a continuation of the 1991 to 2016 urban growth rate. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 198 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report EXPERT COMMENTARY: MINIMISING THE BIODIVERSITY IMPACTS OF GREENFIELD DEVELOPMENT IN THE MOLONGLO VALLEY Dr Philip Gibbons, Associate Professor, Fenner School of Environment and Society, The Australian National University 7 Woinarski, J.C.Z. et al., 2017, ‘How Many Birds Are Killed by Cats in Australia?’, Biological Conservation, 214: 76–87. 8 Meek, P.D., 2003, ,Home Range of House Cats Felis Catus Living Within a National Park’, Australian Mammalogy, 25(1): 51–60. 9 Brown, A., 25 February 2017, ‘Cats Captured from Canberra’s Cat Containment Suburbs on the Increase’, The Canberra Times, Canberra. 10 Rayner, L. et al., 2013, ‘Are Protected Areas Maintaining Bird Diversity?’, Ecography, 37(1): 43–53. 11 Ikin, K. et al., 2015, Key Lessons for Achieving Biodiversity-sensitive Cities and Towns, Ecological Management and Restoration, 16(3): 206–214. 12 Department of the Environment and Energy, 2017, ‘Why are Weeds a Problem?’, found at https://www.environment.gov.au/ biodiversity/invasive/weeds/weeds/why/index.html 13 Neil, R., 2012, Report on the State of the Watercourses and Catchments for Lake Burley Griffin, Part 1, Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and Environment, Canberra. Urban development poses several threats to biodiversity. However, there are actions that governments and residents can take in the Molonglo Valley to minimise these impacts. Edge effects Suburbs pose several threats to native flora and fauna in neighbouring bushland: unrestrained pets, invasive plants and animals, stormwater runoff and bushfire. Pet cats in Australia collectively kill around 167,000 birds per day.7 They also kill a range of small reptiles, mammals and even invertebrates such as butterflies. A cat containment policy is an important conservation measure in suburbs within one kilometre of natural areas since pet cats can roam this distance.8 Although there is mandatory cat containment in all new suburbs of the Molonglo Valley, there is evidence from the RSPCA that compliance with cat containment declines with time.9 Ongoing education and enforcement of cat containment is therefore critical. Development of new suburbs in Canberra has coincided with declines of native birds from adjacent bushland.10 Reasons for this are unclear, but some of Australia’s most aggressive native birds such as the Red Wattlebird, Noisy Miner, Rainbow Lorikeet and Pied Currawong thrive in suburbs and may be pushing other native birds out of neighbouring bushland. Avoiding garden plants that attract these aggressive species to our suburbs (for example, nectar-rich Grevilleas and Callistemons and prolific fruiting plants such as Cotoneaster) may be one solution.11 Approximately 15% of Australia’s plant species are exotic and this is increasing at the rate of about 10 new species annually.12 Weeds represent a threat to biodiversity in Australia because they displace native plants and change habitat, and are virtually impossible to eradicate once established. Urban areas are a known source of weeds that invade adjacent bushland. Garden escapes in the ACT include Cootamundra Wattle, Common Pampas Grass and Cotoneaster. Urban open space in Canberra’s suburbs often becomes dominated by two significant weeds: African Lovegrass and Chilean Needlegrass. Weed control within reserves is undermined where adjacent suburbs support large-source populations of invasive plants. Suburbs contain many hard surfaces such as roofs, roads and footpaths and therefore represent a source of considerable stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff carries large quantities of sediment and nutrients from lawns, leaves, wildlife faeces and leaking sewage infrastructure. This all drains into adjacent waterways. Blooms of blue-green algae in Canberra’s waterways have been traced to these sources.13 Unless managed carefully, stormwater from new suburbs in the Molonglo Valley will impact upon native species in the Molonglo River and downstream, such as the Platypus, Murray Cod and Murray River Crayfish. Bushfires represent a threat to urban communities located next to bushland, but protecting urban communities from bushfires can also represent a threat to wildlife. Asset Protection Zones (APZs), cleared of most trees and shrubs, are maintained around suburbs adjacent to bushland in the ACT. 199 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Good planning can limit the impact of APZs on biodiversity. Designing new suburbs so the perimeter is a road and APZs are within the urban footprint – rather than adjacent bushland – reduces impacts on native wildlife. Some ecological restoration can be undertaken within APZs without increasing the risk to houses during bushfires. For example, rock quarried from new suburbs in the Molonglo Valley has been used to create additional habitat for the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (a vulnerable species). These areas also support low levels of fire fuel hazard.14 Connectivity Urbanisation also contributes to the fragmentation of wildlife populations. Connectivity between wildlife populations is important because it reduces inbreeding, facilitates recolonisation of bushland patches when species have become locally extinct (for example, because of bushfire) and it allows species to move across landscapes, which is important for those affected by climate change. Stepping stones of suitable habitat within urban areas helps connect wildlife populations. For example, one study found that nearly a third of Canberra’s native birds depend on mature eucalypts.15 However, most mature trees are cleared as suburbs are developed and those retained are often removed when they begin senescing. Retention and protection of mature eucalypts within the suburbs of the Molonglo Valley will improve connectivity for native birds and bats. 14 McDougall, A. et al., 2016, ‘Restoration Rocks: Integrating Abiotic and Biotic Habitat Restoration to Conserve Threatened Species and Reduce Fire Fuel Load’, Biodiversity and Conservation, 25(8): 1529–1542. 15 Le Roux, D.S. et al., 2015, ‘Single Large or Several Small? Applying Biogeographic Principles to Tree-level Conservation and Biodiversity Offsets’, Biological Conservation, 191: 558–66. Roads represent a physical barrier to movement by some native species and a significant source of mortality for others. Native species that are killed on roads in Australia include numerous mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians. Increased roads and traffic in the Molonglo Valley will represent an increasing threat to native fauna. Underpasses, barrier fencing and speed limits have all been suggested as ways to mitigate impacts of roads on wildlife. No silver bullet Threats work together to affect biodiversity in urban areas. For example: • nectar-rich plantings in gardens attract hyper-aggressive birds to suburbs • APZs on the edges of suburbs provide less cover for small birds seeking to evade these hyper-aggressive species, and • cats are more effective hunters of small birds in these open habitats. Consequently, there is no silver bullet for conserving biodiversity in or adjacent to urban areas. Effective conservation in the Molonglo Valley will require a series of coordinated actions by government and the community. 05 Indicators, condition and trends 200.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator L2: Land health 16 Cook, W. et al., 2016, Soil Landscapes of the Australian Capital Territory, Office of Environment and Heritage, Queanbeyan, NSW. 17 Muller, R., Jenkins, B. and Nicholson, A., 2017, Soil and Land Degradation Management for the Australian Capital Territory, Office of Environment and Heritage, Wagga Wagga, NSW. 18 Muller, R. et al., 2017, Hydrogeological Landscapes of the Australian Capital Territory, Second edition, Office of Environment and Heritage, Wagga Wagga, NSW. Healthy land supports agriculture, native ecosystems and ecosystem services such as clean water. Soil condition is the main driver of land health and a fundamental part of ecosystems and natural processes including biological activity, the cycling and storage of nutrients and carbon, and the decomposition of organic wastes. Soil health is mostly determined by land use intensity and the degree of modification, or loss of, vegetation cover. The clearing of vegetation can result in accelerated erosion, acidification, salinity, and a reduction in soil nutrients and organic content. Pressures that leave soils bare of vegetation and promote soil degradation include land clearing, fire, high-intensity storms, and agriculture (cropping and grazing). In addition, soil erosion can increase due to the compaction of soil from urban and industrial activities, vehicle use, stock grazing, and invasive species such as horses, deer and feral pigs which can also degrade soil structure. ACT soils are highly variable, but most are considered to be infertile, fragile, and prone to becoming impermeable and eroded. Consequently, soil management is vital to maintain and improve soil health. Degraded soil and land health has a range of consequences, including: • degradation of water quality from increased sediment and other pollutants deposited into rivers and streams (see section 5.6 Water) • air quality and human health impacts from dust storms (see section 5.3 Air) • loss of topsoil limiting the establishment of new vegetation, removing native seedbanks, and promoting the spread of weeds • reduction in agricultural land productivity through reduced yields and pasture growth • increased agricultural costs from greater fertiliser use and land restoration activities, and • erosion damage to infrastructure such as fencing, roads and buildings. Climate change impacts, such as more frequent drought, increased storms and fires, will add to current pressures on land health, particularly through the reduction of vegetation cover and erosion of exposed soils. Assessing ACT’s land health Land health assessments are most commonly made through soil measures such as salinity, acidity, erosion and carbon. Baseline data and ongoing monitoring are required to determine changes in soil condition. There has been no recent systematic assessment of soil condition in the ACT. Consequently, it is not possible to assess the condition of soils and land health in the ACT due to the lack of data. It should be noted that research has been undertaken on the types and characteristics of soil landscapes in the ACT, the nature and consequences of potential soil degradation and the management required to reduce risks, and the salinity risks and priority areas for management.16,17,18 This information will be valuable to assist planning for the most appropriate land use, and improve management to prevent soil degradation. It can also be used to determine where soil monitoring will be most beneficial. However, these studies do not measure the actual extent of soil degradation in the ACT, nor the impacts of such degradation. For private land, assessments of soil health and remediation may be undertaken by community natural resource management groups such as Landcare and Greening Australia with participating landholders. This is discussed in Chapter 3 Community leadership in sustainability and science. 201 5.4 Land.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Land contamination 19 National Environment Protection Council (NEPC), 2019, Annual Report 2017–2018, Canberra, found at http://www.nepc.gov.au/system/files/resources/1ed358dc-9aee-442f-9821-78ce95bf20a6/files/nepc-annual-report-2017-18.pdf, accessed 13 October 2019. Contaminated sites include former petrol stations, landfills, and sites with previous chemical uses (such as sheep dips). These sites can impact on human health and the environment through the leaching of chemicals into groundwater and waterways, the release of air toxics, or through direct contact with contaminated soils and other substances. As the rate of urban infill and greenfield development increases, it is reasonable to expect an increasing number of contaminated sites. The identification of contaminated sites allows their remediation, if required, and allows appropriate land use to be considered for the sites. In this way, development can be a driver for both the increased reporting and remediation of contaminated sites. The Environment Protection Authority has the regulatory responsibility for the oversight of the remediation of contaminated sites. Contaminated sites such as old petrol stations, or those that were used for fuel storage, often require ongoing monitoring to determine any continuing impacts; other sites may be remediated with no further monitoring required. Remediated sites are not currently removed from the contaminated sites register to ensure that any future use of these sites is compatible with site remediation. For example, a site may be remediated to a level that can accommodate industrial development, but may not be appropriate for residential development. As at 2019, there were 1,088 contaminated sites in the ACT. These are mostly sites of former petrol stations or other fuel storage activities which accounted for 587 of the total. Other contaminated sites included 153 former sheep dips and 121 landfills. Compliance with site contamination National Environment Protection Measure (NEPM) Compliance with the National Environment Protection (Assessment of Site Contamination) Measure ensures that the ACT is achieving the national environment protection standard for the assessment of contaminated sites. This NEPM does not include site remediation. The ACT must report annually on compliance with the site contamination NEPM to the National Environment Protection Council. Up to and including 2017–18, the ACT’s contaminated sites monitoring and reporting activities were found to comply with the NEPM.19 Gully erosion. Source: OCSE. 202 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Urban development in Belconnen. Source: Ryan Colley. DATA GAPS • Data on land use in the ACT is poor with assessments reliant on planning zones rather than actual physical changes. Consequently, it is difficult to make assessments of land use changes. • There is a general lack of knowledge on land health in the ACT, both for long-term changes and current conditions. This lack of information means that an assessment of land health over time is not possible and remains a critical gap in our understanding of environmental condition. • There is no routine monitoring for soil health indicators such as erosion, salinity, structure decline, and reductions in organic content. Consequently, understanding of the actual extent of these problems is limited. 203 5.4 Land © Ryan Colley.
5.5 BIODIVERSITY 204 © Ryan Colley 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
Section contents Indicator assessment 207 Key actions 208 Main findings 208 Introduction 212 Pressures on biodiversity 212 Data trends 213 Indicator B1: Threatened species and ecological communities 213 Indicator B2: Extent and condition of conservation areas 222 Indicator B3: Representation of threatened species and ecological communities in conservation areas 230 Indicator B4: Extent and condition of native vegetation 236 Indicator B5: Distribution and abundance of terrestrial invasive plants and animals 254 Data gaps 264 Biodiversity 264 Conservation 264 Native vegetation 264 Invasive species 264 205 5.5 Biodiversity.
141,000 hectares protecting 60% of the ACT 1,865 hectares 47% in nature reserves 100,000 tubestock and 200kg of seed planted on public land 1,500 hectares of revegetation on private land Biodiversity and conservation in the ACT critically endangered Threatened species which are dependent on grasslands and woodlands are the least represented in conservation areas 50% of the Yellow Box / Red Gum Grassy Woodland communities are outside conservation areas 70% of woodland, grassland and open forest communities are outside conservation areas 46% of Striped Legless Lizard habitat is outside conservation areas Only 34% of native vegetation is within optimal tolerable fire interval 54,000 hectares of control for over 100 invasive plant species B Rabbit control is the most common invasive animal management undertaken 7 endangered 18 vulnerable 26 regionally conservation dependent 1 ecological communities are endangered 3 species listed as 52 THREATENED Conservation area Environmental Offsets RevegetationA Representation in conservation areas A - Public land revegetation 2015–16 to 2018–19. Private land revegetation 2015–2018. B - Between 2015–16 to 2018–19. ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 206 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality B1: Threatened species and ecological communities As at 2019, there were 7 critically endangered species, 18 endangered species, 26 vulnerable species and one regionally conservation dependent species in the ACT. Over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19), 17 additional species were listed as threatened and 7 species were transferred to critically endangered to align with their Commonwealth status. There are 3 ecological communities classed as endangered, with High Country Bogs and Associated Fens added during the reporting period. In addition, ‘the loss of mature native trees (including hollow-bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment’ was listed as a key threatening process. While changes in listings do not necessarily represent a decline, it is clear that the future of some species and communities in the ACT are threatened without management intervention. Poor     High B2: Extent and condition of conservation areas Extent: Conservation areas protect 60% of the total ACT area and continue to increase as environmental offsets are added to the Canberra Nature Park network. Extent: Good     High Condition: At the time of reporting, it was not possible to determine the condition of conservation areas in the ACT. It is also not currently possible to assess whether offsets have ensured no net loss of biodiversity as a result of land development. However, assessments for offsets will likely take many years. Recently initiated monitoring programs will greatly improve condition knowledge in the future. Condition: Unknown     Low B3: Representation of threatened species and ecological communities in conservation areas While many of the ACT’s threatened species and ecological communities are well represented in conservation areas, some flora and fauna species and ecological communities remain poorly represented. This is particularly the case for Natural Temperate Grassland and Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland. For species with large proportions of non-reserved habitat, this is due to their dependence on grassland and woodland habitats, which are not as well protected in conservation areas as other ecosystems (such as forests). Fair     Moderate B4: Extent and condition of native vegetation Extent: Due to the large area of conservation reserves, the ACT has extensive areas of native vegetation. Any recent native vegetation losses are estimated to be small and mainly due to changes in land use from urban development. There have also been substantial revegetation efforts to restore habitat and connectivity. Extent: Good     Moderate Condition: It was not possible to determine an overall assessment of vegetation condition for the ACT, or changes over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19). Available condition assessments show an increased occurrence of dieback in the ACT, large areas of poor riparian connectivity, much vegetation outside tolerable fire intervals and vegetation dominated by early and young growth stages. However, woodlands, Natural Temperate Grasslands and secondary grasslands have shown an increase in native plant species richness suggesting an improvement in condition. Condition: Fair     Low B5: Distribution and abundance of terrestrial invasive plants and animals Invasive plants and animals continue to have a significant impact on native species and ecosystem health, and also represent a significant management burden. In areas where invasive species are controlled, outcomes clearly demonstrate the value of well-resourced and ongoing invasive species management to control established populations and to eradicate new outbreaks where possible. Poor     Moderate Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 207 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: increase the protection of mature and hollow-bearing trees to maintain critical habitat. ACTION 2: continue monitoring to evaluate the effectiveness of environmental offset conservation outcomes and the condition of conservation areas. ACTION 3: increase the representation of the threatened Natural Temperate Grasslands and Yellow Box/ Red Gum Grassy Woodland communities in conservation areas, and improve protection for all grassland and open forest communities to support threatened species dependent on these ecosystems. ACTION 4: improve knowledge on changes in vegetation extent from land use change and chronic degradation such as dieback. ACTION 5: continue revegetation programs to improve native vegetation extent and connectivity. ACTION 6: improve knowledge on vegetation condition across the ACT. ACTION 7: ensure tolerable fire intervals are considered in prescribed burn decision frameworks. ACTION 8: continue to undertake invasive and pest species management and ongoing control to minimise the impacts of established populations and to eradicate new outbreaks. ACTION 9: improve funding and resourcing for biodiversity management on private land, and provide incentives to rural landholders to protect paddock trees. ACTION 10: improve funding for citizen science groups that significantly contribute to the ACT’s biodiversity knowledge Main findings Threatened species and ecological communities As at 2019, a total of 52 species of fauna and flora across all habitats (terrestrial and aquatic) were listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. These species include 7 critically endangered, 18 endangered, 26 vulnerable and 1 regionally conservation dependent. During the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19), 17 additional species were listed as threatened and 7 species were transferred to critically endangered to align with their Commonwealth status. Critically endangered species include the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia), Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor), Northern Corroboree Frog (Pseudophryne pengilleyi), the locally extinct Yellow-spotted Bell Frog (Litoria castanea), Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis), Brindabella Midge Orchid (Corunastylis ectopa), and the Kiandra Greenhood (Pterostylis oreophila). Action plans and/or conservation advice have been developed for all species listed as threatened in the ACT. Three ecological communities are listed as endangered. These are Natural Temperate Grassland, Yellow Box/ Red Gum Grassy Woodland, and High Country Bogs and Associated Fens which was added to the endangered category in 2019. In 2018, ‘the loss of mature native trees (including hollow-bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment’ was listed as a key threatening process in the ACT, adversely affecting 4 vulnerable bird species including the Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii), Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus), Glossy Black Cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) and Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides). 208 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Conservation Extent of conservation areas In 2019, 141,000 hectares have conservation status in the ACT, protecting 60% of the total ACT area. This not only represents a significant proportion of the ACT’s natural environment, but is also a much higher proportion than any other jurisdiction in Australia. The Namadgi National Park and Bimberi Wilderness Area account for nearly 80% of the conservation area and around 46% of the total area of the ACT. Nature reserves (including Canberra Nature Park) account for 14% of the conservation estate, with water supply and special purpose reserves accounting for 5% and 3% respectively. Over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19), just over 1,000 hectares were added to the reserve system, primarily through environmental offsets added to the Canberra Nature Park network. The area of environmental offsets has grown from 18 hectares in 2009 to 1,865 hectares in 23 offset areas in 2019. This increase reflects the need to compensate for adverse environmental impacts from the significant increase in the ACT’s urban footprint that has taken place since 2000, and continues today. In 2019, 47% (871 hectares) of offsets were protected by nature reserve. Environmental offsets now contribute to around 16% of the ACT’s urban and peri-urban reserve areas. Outside of protected areas, progress in conservation of biodiversity, including both habitats and species, remains a challenge. Although conservation areas provide protection by excluding damaging land uses and activities, they are still at risk from a range of pressures. Invasive species, inappropriate fire regimes, pathogens and diseases can all threaten ecosystem health and require ongoing intervention to minimise impacts. Condition of conservation areas At the time of reporting, it was not possible to determine the condition of conservation areas in the ACT. It is also not currently possible to assess whether offsets have ensured no net loss of biodiversity following land development. However, assessments for offsets will likely take many years, particularly given that management interventions need to be undertaken over long periods of time to effect the desired ecosystem and biodiversity outcomes. The ACT Government is implementing a Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program to evaluate the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation outcomes. This will greatly improve knowledge of conditions in the future. Climate change will threaten conservation areas, especially where changes to temperature and rainfall, and the occurrence of fire, exceed the tolerances of ecosystems. Representation of threatened fauna in conservation areas The Broad-toothed Rat, Greater Glider, Northern Corroboree Frog, and Smoky Mouse threatened species have all, or close to all, of their known and potential habitat in ACT conservation areas. Other threatened fauna with significant proportions of their known and potential habitat in ACT conservation areas include the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (80%) and Spotted-tailed Quoll (70%). Threatened fauna with less than 50% of their known and potential habitat in ACT conservation areas include the Perunga Grasshopper (47%), Golden Sun Moth (44%), Striped Legless Lizard (33%), and Grassland Earless Dragon (25%). However, these species have a substantial proportion of their habitat on national land (between 20% and 50%) and are subject to management as required under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). The Grey-headed Flying Fox does not have habitat in ACT conservation areas but there are colonies occurring in Commonwealth Park (national land) and at Lake Ginninderra (urban open space). Threatened species with substantial proportions of their known and potential habitat on non-reserved land (outside both ACT reserved and national lands) include the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (20%), Spotted-tailed Quoll (27%), Golden Sun Moth (28%), Perunga Grasshopper (32%), and the Grassland Earless Dragon (33%). Of particular concern is the lack of reserved habitat for the Striped Legless Lizard with 46% of habitat not reserved. For species with large proportions of non-reserved habitat, this is due to their dependence on grassland and woodland habitats which are not as well protected in conservation areas as other ecosystems such as forests. All of the ACT-listed aquatic species have around 90% to 100% of their potential distribution in conservation areas. Representation of threatened flora in conservation areas Over half of the known threatened plant sites in the ACT are located in reserves or on other land managed by the ACT Parks and Conservation Service (PCS). An additional 20% occur on national land, which is managed by the National Capital Authority.
 Threatened flora species with a substantial proportion of known locations outside ACT conservation areas include Black Gum (Eucalyptus aggregata), Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides), Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum), Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis), Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta), and Murrumbidgee Bossiaea (Bossaiea grayi). 209 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Representation of threatened ecological communities in conservation areas Of the three ecological communities listed as endangered in the ACT, only High Country Bogs and Associated Fens are fully protected in ACT conservation areas. Natural Temperate Grassland has just over half of its known distribution in ACT conservation areas, and Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland has only 30% reserved. However, both Natural Temperate Grasslands and Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland have substantial proportions of their extent on national land at nearly 30% and 20% respectively, and are subject to management as required under the EPBC Act. Despite this, nearly half of the ACT’s Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland is not reserved, and some 20% of Natural Temperate Grasslands are also unreserved. The low levels of reservation add to the pressures on these communities and the species they support. For the 11 vegetation classes assessed, 8 had more than 80% of their extent protected, and another 2 had over 60% of their extent protected. The most under-represented vegetation class was Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands which only has 30% of its extent in conservation areas. The least protected vegetation communities in the ACT are woodland, grassland and open forest communities, with under 30% of their extent protected in conservation areas. Native vegetation Extent It was not possible to determine changes in the extent of native vegetation over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19). Native vegetation losses are estimated to be small and mainly due to changes in land use due to urban development. It is important that there is consideration of the cumulative impacts of small modifications to habitat, because these can lead to thresholds being crossed unknowingly and unintentionally for at least some aspects of vegetation and ecosystem health. Most of the ACT’s vegetation loss has been from historic clearing on lowlands and modification of ecosystems for agriculture and urban development. It is estimated that there has been little change in the distribution of upland vegetation types. Prior to European settlement, Natural Temperate Grasslands were thought to cover over 25,000 hectares or 11% of the ACT area, but today they only cover around 1,100 hectares, less than 1% of the ACT. For Lowland Box Gum Woodlands, the pre-European settlement distribution was thought to be over 47,000 hectares or 20% of the ACT area, but these woodlands now only cover some 11,500 hectares, around 5% of the ACT. While the loss of native vegetation due to urban development remains of concern, it is unlikely to be the largest source of native vegetation change in the ACT. Chronic degradation of habitat condition, mainly in fragmented landscapes, is a significant problem in the ACT. There has been substantial revegetation in the Murrumbidgee River Corridor nature reserves, Lower Cotter Catchment and other areas of public lands to restore habitat and connectivity. This has included planting some 100,000 tube stocks and 200 kilograms of native seed. In addition, there were revegetation activities on some 1,500 hectares of private land between 2015 and 2018, mainly through works undertaken by Greening Australia. Condition It was not possible to determine changes in the condition of native vegetation over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19). Nor was it possible to provide an overall assessment of vegetation condition. Climate change has led to an increased occurrence of dieback in the ACT. There has been a significant increase in the incidence of dieback in Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi). Significant areas of riparian vegetation on the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo Rivers have poor connectivity particularly in areas outside of reserves. Since 2009, woodlands, Natural Temperate Grasslands and secondary grasslands have shown an increase in native plant species richness suggesting an improvement in condition. However, woodland native species richness has seen a slight overall decline since 2014, possibly due to drought conditions experienced in 2018. Native grass cover across all vegetation formations has been declining since 2012. This decline does not appear to be linked to drought. More analysis is required to determine if it is linked to management practices. The decline in this indicator is a concern because it has implications for fauna habitat and for weed invasion. 210 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report In 2018, only 34% of the total area of native vegetation assessed was found to be within the optimal tolerable fire interval to maintain vegetation communities, 53% was below minimum TFI (fire interval too short to maintain vegetation in its optimal state), 7% above the maximum TFI (fire interval too long to maintain vegetation in its optimal state), and 6% classed as long unburnt. Native vegetation growth stages across the ACT reflect a similar pattern to tolerable fire interval status, with extensive areas of the uplands being dominated by early and young growth stages due to the 2003 bushfires. This has significant implications for biodiversity, especially for fauna that require older growth stages. In the longer term, conservation needs to focus on diversifying growth stages. In the lowlands, this can be achieved through the ecological burning of late and mature growth stages for vegetation resilient to fire. However, in the uplands achieving growth stage diversity will require time and deliberate protection of the relatively rare older growth stages from prescribed fire and bushfire until more of the landscape reaches post-fire maturity. Invasive terrestrial plants and animals Invasive plant and animal species continue to pose a major threat to biodiversity, ecosystem health, primary production, social amenity and human health. Data on management outcomes clearly demonstrates the value of invasive species management to control established populations and to eradicate new outbreaks where possible. Management results also show the risk of invasive plant and animal populations re-establishing themselves in the absence of ongoing control. Invasive plants There have been 592 invasive plant species recorded in the ACT. Data on management activities clearly demonstrates the value of invasive plant management to control established populations and to eradicate new outbreaks where possible. Management results also show the risk of invasive plant populations re-establishing themselves in the absence of ongoing control. Over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19), 54,000 hectares of invasive plant control was undertaken in the ACT for over 100 invasive plant species. Serrated tussock accounted for the largest area treated at nearly 14,000 hectares, followed by St. John’s wort (over 10,000 hectares), blackberry (7,700 hectares) and African lovegrass (6,900 hectares). Invasive animals It was not possible to comprehensively determine the distribution and abundance of invasive animals in the ACT for this report. Records show the presence of 64 introduced animal species in the ACT, including 17 mammals, 33 birds, 2 lizards, 1 frog and 11 fish. The invasive animal species of most concern in the ACT are feral pigs, deer, foxes, rabbits, horses and wild dogs, with control programs undertaken for all these pests. Rabbits are the most widespread and damaging invasive animal in the ACT, impacting on natural and rural lands. Rabbit control is the most common invasive animal management undertaken. Deer and horses have the potential to cause significant environmental damage to sensitive alpine bogs and fens, woodlands and agriculture. As with invasive plants, to be effective the management of mobile and rapid breeding animals such as rabbits requires ongoing control. Despite the significant impacts on native wildlife, the ACT has no formal programs to manage stray or feral cats. The exception is cat containment legislation for new suburban developments. Foxes have been shown to have a devastating impact on native wildlife in the ACT with the potential to cause local extinctions of vulnerable native species. Foxes were responsible for the loss of Bettongs released in the Lower Cotter Catchment between 2015 and 2017. The restoration of native populations is dependent on the effective control of invasive species. Annual kangaroo culls are undertaken to protect the ACT’s grassy ecosystems from overgrazing. Between 2009 and 2019, over 22,000 kangaroos were culled. The largest annual cull was 4,035 kangaroos conducted in 2019. The annual cull numbers have increased annually since 2013, mainly due to the increased number of management sites. 211 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION This section provides an assessment of biodiversity in the ACT, including threatened and important species, conservation of ecosystems and species, native vegetation, and invasive plants and animals. The following indicators are assessed: • B1: Threatened species and ecological communities • B2: Extent and condition of conservation areas • B3: Representation of threatened species and ecological communities in conservation areas • B4: Extent and condition of native vegetation • B5: Distribution and abundance of terrestrial invasive plants and animals Healthy biodiversity is essential to the natural world and fundamental to human life. The complex and dynamic interactions between plants, animals, microorganisms and soil, water and air underpin the health of the ecosystems. Whilst biodiversity is dependent on good ecosystem health, biodiversity itself plays a pivotal role in maintaining ecosystems. Biodiversity loss or decline can have significant consequences for natural processes, decrease the availability of habitat, and impact on predator–prey relationships. In severe cases, biodiversity loss can lead to significant changes in ecosystems and the functions they provide. Biodiversity may also make ecosystems more resilient to pressures such as climate change and fire. A diversity of species and ecological processes can help ecosystems to maintain their core functions in the face of environmental change. Because terrestrial ecosystems are intimately connected to aquatic ecosystems, their degradation has consequences for the condition of the ACT’s rivers, lakes, and wetlands. Healthy ecosystems, biodiversity and land provide a range of benefits to human wellbeing, including climate regulation, clean air and water, nutrient cycling, pollination, control of pests, carbon sequestration, and the supply of foods and fibres. It is important to maintain and, where necessary, improve the health of ecosystems to ensure the continued availability of the services they provide. Pressures on biodiversity The main pressures on biodiversity in the ACT are land use change (particularly greenfield development), climate change, invasive plants and animals, vegetation loss, habitat fragmentation and changes to fire regimes. The use of chemicals such as pesticides can also have significant impacts on biodiversity, especially insects. Climate change is predicted to compound existing pressures on biodiversity. Projections of significant shifts in local climates and increases in drought, bushfires and storms, will have an impact on biodiversity and natural ecosystems. Climate change is likely to impact species with limited capacity to migrate, such as those restricted to particular habitats and fragmented landscapes, or those that tolerate only narrow ranges of temperature and rainfall. Species dependent on wetland and mountainous ecosystems have been identified as being at greatest risk. Climate change will exacerbate current environmental pressures; therefore the capacity of natural ecosystems to adapt to climate change will improve if existing threats are addressed. 212 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA TRENDS Indicator B1: Threatened species and ecological communities Biodiversity is the variety of life. This can include the diversity of genes within a species, the diversity of species within a landscape and the diversity of ecosystems across landscapes. It can also include the diversity of ecological processes that underpin the functioning of ecosystems such as seed dispersal, pollination and nutrient cycling. The ACT’s terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems are home to many flora and fauna species. The urban environment also supports many species, either as a food source or a place to live. Records from Canberra Nature Map show that there have been 2,815 fauna species sighted in the ACT.1 This includes 2,751 native species – 67 mammals, 298 birds, 14 snakes, 49 lizards, 37 frogs, 2 turtles, 28 fish, 188 spiders and 2068 insects. There have also been 64 introduced species recorded – 17 mammals, 33 birds, 2 lizards, 1 frog and 11 fish. For flora, the 2017 Census of the Flora of the Australian Capital Territory found 2,088 indigenous species (1,032 vascular plants, 263 fungi, 490 lichens, 3 hornworts, 77 liverworts, 195 mosses and 28 slime moulds). It also found 592 introduced species, 53 of which were introduced from elsewhere in Australia.2 The ACT has 4 endemic plant species from 3 families: Canberra Spider Orchid, Brindabella Midge Orchid, Ginninderra Peppercress and Tuggeranong Lignum. It is not possible to accurately measure the distribution and abundance of all species in the ACT. This is because not all species occurring in the ACT are known, let alone counted, and not all areas of the ACT can be surveyed and monitored. Consequently, assessment of biodiversity is mainly focused on the monitoring and management of threatened species. 1 More information on the Canberra Nature Map can be found at https://canberra.naturemapr.org/ 2 Australian National Herbarium, Centre for Australian National Biodiversity Research, 2017, Census of the Flora of the ACT, found at https://www.anbg.gov.au/cpbr/ACT-census-2017/index.html 3 The Nature Conservation Act 2014 can be found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2014-59/default.asp 4 EPSDD, ACT Scientific Committee, more information found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/advisory-bodies/ act-scientific-committee It is important to note that some species found in the ACT are temporary residents. Migratory and highly mobile species such as birds may only be present for breeding, or in response to food and water availability. For such species, changes in their annual abundance and distributions in the ACT may result from external influences including changes to food availability, loss of habitat or increase in invasive species. Consequently, populations can increase or decrease regardless of the condition of the ACT environment. Listing of Threatened Species and ecological communities in the ACT The Nature Conservation Act 2014 (ACT) establishes a formal process for the identification and protection of threatened species and ecological communities, as well the identification of ecologically significant threatening processes.3 The ACT Scientific Committee is responsible for providing advice on listings under the Act.4 The listing of threatened species reflects the International Union for the Conservation of Nature categories and criteria to improve alignment with the Commonwealth’s listing categories. The different categories provide a guide as to the level of management which a species may require. A species may be assessed at the national scale and listed in a national category as extinct, extinct in the wild, critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable, or conservation dependent. A native species occurring in the ACT may be listed in a regional category if it does not meet national criteria. 213 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Limitations of threatened species and community lists The extent and abundance of threatened flora and fauna species and associated changes in threatened status may provide a measure of the condition of biodiversity and highlight those species at risk. For example, if a species moves from vulnerable to endangered it may indicate potential biodiversity loss. However, the number of threatened species needs to be interpreted with caution as listings are influenced by factors such as effort and attention given to different species, improved knowledge rather than actual changes in status, changes in the methodology used to assign status, and the number of taxa reviewed regularly. It is also important to note that conservation status for a species is assessed for all of the ACT; it does not reflect local variations in population status, nor the status of species in other parts of Australia. The status of threatened species may also be of limited value in determining changes in environmental condition. This is because a species may be affected by a combination of pressures, or by subtle drivers that do not impact on the wider ecosystem. Despite these factors, the listing of threatened species and ecological communities, as well as changes to threat status over time, can be useful for assessing the effectiveness of management actions. Threatened species in the ACT In 2019, a total of 52 species of fauna and flora across all habitats (terrestrial and aquatic) were listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Figure 1). These species included: • 7 critically endangered species, with 1, the Yellow-spotted Bell Frog (Litoria castanea), locally extinct. • 18 endangered species. • 26 vulnerable species, with 2, the Green and Golden Bell Frog (Litoria aurea) and the Southern Bell Frog (Litoria raniformis), locally extinct. • 1 species, the Eastern Bettong, regionally conservation dependent. Birds, mammals and flora accounted for the majority of threatened species in the ACT. All local extinctions occurred decades ago and were amphibian species which are among the most threatened group of animals in Australia and globally. Changes to species listed as threatened over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19) include: • 17 additional species have been listed as threatened. • 7 species transferred to critically endangered to be consistent with Commonwealth status. These are the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia), Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor), Northern Corroboree Frog (Pseudophryne pengilleyi), the locally extinct Yellow-spotted Bell Frog (Litoria castanea), Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis), Brindabella Midge Orchid (Corunastylis ectopa), and the Kiandra Greenhood (Pterostylis oreophila). • 4 species added as endangered to be consistent with Commonwealth status. • 11 species added as vulnerable due to assessment of additional data and/or to be consistent with Commonwealth status. Action plans and/or conservation advice have been developed for all species listed as threatened in the ACT. Some of the ACT’s threatened fauna species lack wild populations, only occurring in managed sanctuaries. These species include: • Eastern Quoll and New Holland Mouse: there are no known wild populations in the ACT, although both species have been reintroduced to the Woodland Sanctuary at Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve. • Eastern Bettong: there are reintroduced populations at Tidbinbilla and Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve. • Southern Brown Bandicoot: has a reintroduced population at Tidbinbilla. The species was recorded outside Tidbinbilla after the 2003 fires but has not been recorded since then, despite targeted survey effort in 2011. • Koala and Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby: there are no recent records of both species and are presumed extinct in the ACT. There is a reintroduced population of Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby in an enclosure at Tidbinbilla and areas of potential habitat occur in Namadgi National Park. A full list of threatened species and their main threats are shown in Table 1 at the end of the Biodiversity section. 214 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Flora Invertebrates Fish Reptiles Amphibians Mammals Birds Critically endangered Number of species Endangered Vulnerable Regionally conservation dependent Figure 1: Species listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Critically endangered: a species is facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild in the immediate future; Endangered: a species is facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near future; Vulnerable: a species is facing a high risk of extinction in the wild in the medium-term future; Regionally conservation dependent: either a species of fish and/or the subject of a plan of management that if ended may result in the species becoming threatened. Superb Parrot. Source: Ryan Colley. 215 5.5 Biodiversity © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: TRENDS IN BROWN TREECREEPER POPULATION Supplied by the Canberra Ornithologists Group The Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus) is listed as vulnerable under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. The Canberra Ornithologists Group (COG) Annotated Checklist for the Birds of the Australian Capital Territory (November 2017) lists the Brown Treecreeper as a rare, breeding resident. The Brown Treecreeper inhabits open Box Gum Woodland, with an open understorey and fallen timber, and requires suitable breeding hollows. The species appears to be at a disadvantage if the vegetation remains ungrazed and the grassy herb layer becomes tall and dense. The Brown Treecreeper is a species that declines or disappears in response to increased urbanisation. The greatest threat to the Brown Treecreeper is habitat loss from land clearing, habitat fragmentation, clearance of hollow-bearing trees, a lack of tree recruitment, or removal of fallen timber. The fragmentation of woodlands may mean that the small pockets of surviving birds are not resilient enough to overcome disturbance events such as droughts, fire and vegetation loss. Distribution and abundance Once common in the ACT, the Brown Treecreeper has been absent from several sites for many years, including Mount Ainslie and Campbell Park. Surveys conducted in association with the COG woodland surveys have shown that over the period 2000 to 2017 the Brown Treecreeper has disappeared from 11 woodland survey sites in the ACT. The survey sites in this project include reserves within peri-urban Canberra, some leasehold sites, and Department of Defence-managed land. Reports from other sites within the ACT and surrounding NSW from which long-term records have been collected also suggest that the birds are no longer present. There are some birds remaining around Googong foreshores and south of Canberra on the Monaro. From 2000 to 2009, the Brown Treecreeper reporting rate across the ACT and surrounding area remained relative stable at around 3–4%, but this decreased to 0.7% in 2018 (Figure 2). In addition, the largest number reported in 2018 was of 8 individuals and only 5 of the 82 reports received were in the ACT. Surveys of 15 woodland sites conducted between 1998 and 2018 shows a general downward trend in the reporting rate for the Brown Treecreeper. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Autumn Summer Spring Winter 2009 Reporting rate % 2018 Figure 2: A comparison of reporting rate for Brown Treecreeper across the ACT and surrounding area over four seasons in 2009 and 2018. Notes: Data taken from records held by the Canberra Ornithologists Group where reporting rate is taken as the number of recorded occurrences, divided by the total number of lists expressed as a percentage 216 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report These results suggest that the future presence of the Brown Treecreeper in the ACT is in some doubt. Despite the creation of reserves and improvements in woodland management, the Brown Treecreeper, along with other woodland species such as the Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata cucullata, also listed as vulnerable), continue to decline in the ACT. For example, management intervention at Kama South Nature Reserve in the Molonglo Valley – such as the creation of a dedicated reserve, revegetation, grazing exclusion, and weed control – has not prevented the decline and subsequent disappearance of the Brown Treecreeper from the area. Research There are two Brown Treecreeper research or monitoring projects currently active in the ACT: • The Canberra Ornithologists Group continues to receive ad hoc sightings on the location and number of Brown Treecreeper seen in the ACT and local region. These continuing observations started in 1981. • An analysis and interpretation of results of a long-term dataset collected from woodland sites within the ACT is under way including an analysis of Brown Treecreeper observations. Brown Treecreeper. Photo: Harvey Perkins. 217 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: GRASSLAND EARLESS DRAGON Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) 5 Melville, J. et al., 2019, ‘Taxonomy and Conservation of Grassland Earless Dragons: New Species and an Assessment of the First Possible Extinction of a Reptile on Mainland Australia’, Royal Society Open Science 6(5). The Grassland Earless Dragon is a small species of dragon lizard. It was previously thought to be one species, with disjointed populations spanning from near Melbourne to the Bathurst region. However, research in 2019 revealed that there are actually four distinct species of Grassland Earless Dragon with much smaller ranges and population sizes.5 The species found in the ACT region (Tympanocryptis lineata) is not found anywhere else in Australia. The Canberra Grassland Earless Dragon lives solely in patches of Natural Temperate Grassland in the ACT, and just across the NSW border in Queanbeyan. The species was previously thought to be extinct until its rediscovery in the early 1990s. It is currently listed as endangered in the ACT and nationally. Since its rediscovery, there has been a concerted effort to understand more about the dragon’s biology, ecology and population trends. The Canberra Grassland Earless Dragon inhabits fairly undisturbed Natural Temperature Grasslands dominated by wallaby grasses (Rytidosperma spp.) and spear grasses (Astrostipa spp.). They use burrows for shelter, temperature regulation, and to lay their eggs in spring. These burrows are thought to be made, or enhanced, by invertebrates such as wolf spiders and the Canberra Raspy Cricket (Cooraboorama canberrae). Distribution and abundance The current population size of the Canberra Grassland Earless Dragon is small. Long-term monitoring at four grassland sites in the ACT over the last two decades has found that while there are some short-term fluctuations in population numbers, there has been an overall decline in both the number of sites where the lizards are found and a general decline in numbers detected at each site. A significant decline in population numbers occurred during the millennium drought (1999–2009), which coincided with overgrazing, mostly by kangaroos. Although the population showed a general recovery in response to post-drought average and above average rainfall, the lack of recovery at some sites is of major concern. This appears to be related to unsuitable habitat conditions such as grass that is either too long or too short, as well as weed infestations. This in turn is related to the pressure of kangaroo grazing and weeds. The recent dry conditions have resulted in very low numbers detected at monitoring sites. Breeding program In 2019, a breeding program for Canberra Grassland Earless Dragons was established at Melbourne Zoo through collaboration between the ACT Government and Zoos Victoria. Twelve dragons were sourced from grassland in the ACT as the initial founders for the program. The breeding program will allow for the future reintroduction of dragons back into the wild, including at sites where they have not been detected for some years. Habitat restoration From 2013 to 2015, vegetation density at the monitoring sites increased due to above average rainfall and a reduction in herbivore grazing pressure. This has led to a reduction in habitat quality and corresponding decline in the dragon population. To improve grassland habitat, the ACT Government, with funding from the National Landcare Program, implemented a large-scale ecological burning program in 2015. Since then, over 50 hectares of dragon habitat has been burned in either spring or autumn. Over this period, seven monitoring grids where the dragon had been lost were also burned. These burns successfully opened up the vegetation and have led to very positive outcomes, with all areas subsequently being re-colonised by the Canberra Grassland Earless Dragon. 218 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Grassland Earless Dragon captured in 2019 monitoring at Jerrabomberra East. The green mark is used to track individual dragons throughout the monitoring period. Photo: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. Small-scale patch burns being undertaken at Jerrabomberra West grassland by the Parks and Conservation Service. This area was previously occupied by the grassland earless dragon. Photo: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. Threatened ecological communities An ecological community is defined as a naturally occurring group of native plants, animals and other organisms that are interacting in a unique habitat. The community’s structure, composition and distribution are determined by environmental factors such as soil type, position in the landscape, altitude, climate, and water availability. The native plants and animals within an ecological community have different roles and relationships that, together, contribute to the healthy functioning of the environment and to the provision of ecosystem services. Under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 a community may be listed as collapsed, critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable or provisional. In 2019, there were three ecological communities in the ACT listed as endangered: • Natural Temperate Grassland (listed 15 April 1996). • Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland (listed 30 May 1997). • High Country Bogs and Associated Fens (listed 8 February 2019). 219 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: HIGH COUNTRY BOGS AND ASSOCIATED FENS Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate High Country Bogs and Associated Fens was added to the endangered category of the ACT Threatened Ecological Communities List on 8 February 2019. This is consistent with national and other jurisdictional listings. The majority of bogs and fens in the ACT occur within Namadgi National Park (Figure 3). Bogs and fens are significant because they provide critical refuge and habitat for endemic and threatened animal species, including the Critically Endangered Northern Corroboree Frog (Pseudophryne pengilleyi), as well as the Broad-toothed Rat (Mastacomys fuscus mordicus) and Verreaux’s Alpine Tree Frog (Litoria verreauxii alpina). Bogs and fens also play an important role in protecting water quality within the ACT’s water catchment. The Ginini Flats Wetland Complex is one of the most significant intact Sphagnum bog and fen communities in the Australian Alps and is listed under the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (known as the Ramsar convention). Climate change and its associated impacts pose the greatest threat to the bogs and fens in the long term, with potentially severe consequences. In the short term, fire, weed invasion, trampling and wallowing by hoofed pest animals, tourism and recreational activities are key threats to bogs and fens in the ACT. Hard-hoofed animals can be particularly destructive to bogs and fens. Changes to feral horse policy in NSW combined with the increase in numbers and range of feral deer means that the risk is increasing. The ACT feral horse management plan has been successful in quickly controlling the occasional horse incursions from Kosciuszko National Park. However, feral horses are considered a potential significant threat to this fragile ecological community if ACT control measures are insufficient to deal with increased incursions arising from changes to NSW legislation to protect wild horses. The overall objective is to conserve High Country Bogs and Associated Fens in perpetuity as a viable and well-represented community across its natural geographic range in the ACT by: • protecting all areas of bogs and fens in the ACT through reservation • managing threats (particularly hard-hoofed animals and fire) • improving the condition and ecological function of bogs and fens • improving understanding of bog and fen ecology, restoration principles and best practice threat management, particularly in light of climate change, and • strengthening stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of bogs and fens. 220 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 3: Bogs and Fens in the ACT. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 221 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key threatening processes A process is defined as threatening if it has the potential to threaten the survival of a species or ecological community in the ACT. These processes include effects of past clearing, fragmentation and modification of habitat, the impacts of invasive plants and animals, the alteration of hydrological regimes and the increasing threat of climate change. Under the Nature Conservation Act 2014, a process may be listed as a key threatening process. This listing is a formal recognition of a conservation threat and requires an Action Plan to be prepared to address the threatening process. In 2018, ‘the loss of mature native trees (including hollow-bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment’ was listed as a key threatening process in the ACT. The significant loss of mature trees was determined by the Scientific Committee to be adversely affecting the Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii), Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus), Glossy Black Cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) and Little Eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides). These species are listed as vulnerable in the ACT. The main threatening processes for all listed threatened species in the ACT are shown in Table 1 at the end of the Biodiversity section. Indicator B2: Extent and condition of conservation areas The ACT’s conservation areas are critical for the protection of natural ecosystems and the biodiversity and services they support. Parks and reserves provide habitat for many threatened species and ecological communities. They represent the ACT’s most extensive and least disturbed environments, as well as remnant ecosystems within urban and agricultural lands. Conservation areas provide a range of benefits for the ACT community including ecosystem services such as clean air and water. Conservation areas also play an important role in nature-based recreation and tourism, which provides significant health and education benefits and contributes to the ACT economy. Whilst conservation areas exclude damaging land uses and activities, the ecosystems and biodiversity they protect are still at risk from a range of pressures. Invasive species, inappropriate fire regimes, 6 Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities, 2012, Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, Environmental Offsets Policy, Commonwealth of Australia. 7 Planning and Development Act 2007 (ACT), s. 111C. 8 Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2018, Independent Audit of the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment. ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-gungahl in-strategic-assessment 9 Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2018, Independent Audit of the Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-molong lo-valley-strategic-assessment pathogens and diseases present a serious threat to the ACT’s ecosystems and biodiversity and require ongoing intervention to minimise impacts. Climate change will also threaten conservation areas, especially where changes to temperature and rainfall, and the occurrence of fire, exceed the tolerances of ecosystems. Environmental offsets Environmental offsets are land added to environmental reserves to address potential development pressures. In the ACT, offsets provide environmental compensation for a development that is likely to have adverse environmental impact on a protected matter. In the ACT, offsets are categorised as those that are: • required under the EPBC Act to compensate for the residual adverse impacts of an action on Commonwealth-listed threatened species and communities classed as Matters of National Environmental Significance (MNES).6 MNES within the ACT that are currently protected in land offsets include White Box, Yellow Box, Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (Box Gum Woodland), Natural Temperate Grassland, Striped Legless Lizard (Delma impar), Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana), Pink-tailed Worm Lizard (Aprasia parapulchella), Superb Parrot (Polyteli swainsonii), and Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorhynchoides). • required under the ACT’s Planning and Development Act 2007 (the Planning Act) to provide environmental compensation for the likely impact on a declared protected matter.7 Almost all environmental offsets within the ACT are delivered via direct land offsets which protect, conserve and restore areas land with specific ecological values. Indirect offsetting is generally a last resort or an additional requirement such as the proposal of development funding research into a protected matter. Indirect offsets have been established in respect of Strategic Assessments in Gungahlin and the Molonglo Valley. In response to a ministerial direction, independent audits of the Gungahlin and Molonglo Valley offsets have been undertaken.8, 9 These assessments focused on the implementation of commitments in accordance with procedures established under the EPBC Act.
 For each audit, Corrective Action Requests were issued, all of which were addressed by the ACT Government and the audit closed. The next audits are due in 2022. 222 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Extent of conservation areas In 2019, there was 141,000 hectares of conservation areas in the ACT, protecting 60% of the total ACT area (Figure 4). This not only represents a significant proportion of the ACT’s natural environment, but is also a much higher proportion than any other jurisdiction in Australia. Categories of conservation in the ACT include national park, wilderness area, nature reserve, water supply protection, and special purpose reserve. The Namadgi National Park and Bimberi Wilderness Area account for nearly 80% of the conservation area and around 46% of the total area of the ACT. Nature reserves (including Canberra Nature Park) accounts for 14% of the conservation estate, with water supply and special purpose reserves accounting for 5% and 3% respectively (Figure 5). Figure 4: ACT Conservation areas by type. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and Community Services Notes: National Park includes the Namadgi National Park, Bimberi Wilderness Area and the Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve. Nature Reserve includes Canberra Nature Park, the Molonglo River Reserve, Murrumbidgee River Corridor and the Jerrabomberra Wetlands. 223 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000 Special purpose reserve Water supply Nature reserve Wilderness area National park hectares Figure 5: Conservation categories in the ACT as at 2019. Data sourced from: ACT Parks and Conservation Service Conservation areas, as designated under the Territory Plan 1993, show an increase of nearly 13,000 hectares between 1997 and 2018 (Figure 6). The large increase in 2008 is due to the declaration of the Lower Cotter Catchment as a reserve. Over the reporting period 2015–16 to 2018–19, just over 1,000 hectares were added to the reserve system, primarily through environmental offsets added to the Canberra Nature Park network. 0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 Total 2018 2016 2014 2012 2010 2008 2006 2004 2002 2000 1997 hectares Figure 6: Additions to conservation areas designated under the Territory Plan, 1993 to 2018. Data sourced from: ACT Parks and Conservation Service 224 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Environmental offsets The area of ACT environmental offsets has grown from 18 hectares in 2009 to some 1,865 hectares of ACT land in 2019 (Figure 7).10 This growth reflects the need to compensate for adverse environmental impacts from the significant increase in the ACT’s urban footprint that has occurred since 2000, and continues today. In 2019, 47% (871 hectares) of offsets were protected by nature reserve. This represents a significant increase in the area of offsets included in the reserve 10 This area does not include the Kenny 160 hectare offset approved as part of the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment [Umwelt Pty Ltd, 2013, Gungahlin Strategic Assessment: Biodiversity Plan: Final, Umwelt, Canberra], which has not yet been established and is not yet in the reserve system. system since 2013 (Figure 7). Environmental offsets now contribute to around 16% of the ACT’s urban reserve areas. There are currently 23 offset areas in the ACT, with the 688 hectare Molonglo offset by far the largest area, contributing around a third of the total offset area (Figure 8). The ACT Parks and Conservation Service manage over 90% of the total offset area on behalf of the ACT Government. There are also a small number of other offset managers within the ACT who own and manage varying amounts of offset land. 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,000 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Offset area Hectares Offset area protected by Nature Reserve Figure 7: Extent of Commonwealth Government-approved offsets in the ACT and area protected by nature reserve, 2009 to 2019. Data sourced from: ACT Parks and Conservation Service 225 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 8: Environmental offsets managed by ACT Parks and Conservation Service in the ACT. Data sourced from: ACT Parks and Conservation Service 226 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: THE OFFSET PROGRAM IN THE ACT Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service (PCS) The management of offsets involves a range of activities including the management of weeds and invasive plants as well as invasive and overabundant animals, utilisation of conservation grazing techniques, creation of small-scale infrastructure such as tracks, trails and fencing, and signage to help protect values by informing the public of the importance of those values and the threats they face. The management and monitoring of offset areas involves collaboration with community groups such as the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust, ParkCare groups, rural lessees, private businesses, universities, research groups, and Friends of the Grasslands. The ACT offsets program also collaborates and works on significant research programs, including Superb Parrot foraging and breeding behaviour, and Golden Sun Moth translocation research. An extensive monitoring program of MNES and associated values has been established by PCS across all offset sites. The monitoring program measures changes in condition, helps to understand the population status of MNES fauna within offsets, and informs management approaches. Currently, PCS monitors 450 permanent monitoring points annually for a variety of ecological values to inform population trends and management effectiveness. Some examples of ACT environmental offsets and their management are discussed below. Throsby North and Throsby East The Throsby North and Throsby East environmental offset sites (required as part of the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment) added 273 hectares to the already established Goorooyarroo and Mulligans Flat Nature Reserves. Combined with other woodlands within the ACT and NSW, the offset areas are part of one of the largest, best-connected and most diverse patches of Box Gum Grassy Woodland remaining in south-eastern Australia. Throsby also contains over half of the Superb Parrot nesting sites in the ACT. Works were undertaken in 2015 and 2016 in partnership with the Woodland and Wetlands Trust, ANU, developers, and other key stakeholders. These activities involved woody debris placement utilising trees removed from development sites. Weed and pest removal, as well as conservation grazing, are continuing on this site. Extensive monitoring is also conducted on site, including monitoring of the Golden Sun Moth, Box Gum Woodland, vegetation structure, woodland birds and detailed weed density surveys. Throsby is also included in the Superb Parrot Monitoring and Research Program, which involves rigorous field monitoring to develop an understanding of the habitats used by this threatened parrot. Placement of vertical stags at Throsby Environmental Offset area. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. Barrer Hill restoration project In 2014, the ACT Government commenced the Barrer Hill project to restore a 50 hectare former pine plantation back to a Box Gum Woodland community. To date, works have included: • planting of over 50,000 native trees, shrubs, grasses and wildflowers as habitat and a vital movement corridor for wildlife. • placement of 80 tonnes of salvaged rock to extend and enhance habitat for the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard. • placement of over 1,000 tonnes of salvaged coarse woody debris to enhance ground storey condition and provide habitat for declining woodland birds and other fauna species. 227 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report • enhancement of ground storey diversity at 3 forb enhancement sites. • installation of 10 vertical habitat structures to mimic habitat characteristics of mature trees, and • installation of a habitat sculpture designed to create a living artwork that engages the public and provides critical habitat, including natural hollows, peeling bark and perch sites. The site demonstrates the successful implementation of cutting-edge restoration methods and serves as an outdoor laboratory where students and the community can see and learn about restoration practices first hand. Tree plantings and coarse woody debris placement. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. Before and after photo of forb enhancement site. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. Franklin Grasslands – Community engagement and opportunities for the future Franklin Grasslands (also known as North Mitchell Grasslands) is a 20 hectare proposed nature reserve located within the suburb of Franklin in the north Canberra district of Gungahlin. The site contains Golden Sun Moth and Striped Legless Lizard habitat and Natural Temperate Grassland, as well as a population of the critically endangered Ginninderra Peppercress, a plant found only in the ACT. Commitments for this offset include increasing the quality and extent of existing Golden Sun Moth habitat and maintaining the quality of the Natural Temperate Grassland. The site is well placed to provide opportunities to increase community engagement and awareness of the importance and value of grasslands and the flora and fauna they support. As part of a consultation process with the public, community interest will be gauged to inform potential public involvement in the reserve’s management. Once the site is restored, it will provide visual amenity for the local community. There is also potential for this site to incorporate environmentally sensitive infrastructure (paths, platforms and interpretation), in addition to increasing awareness of local conservation values through environmental and cultural education activities. The infrastructure could even link local residential areas to the light rail. Golden Sun Moth. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. 228 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Condition of conservation areas At the time of reporting, it was not possible to determine the condition of conservation areas in the ACT. Condition assessments will require significant monitoring of the health of vegetation (see Indicator B4: Extent and condition of native vegetation) and biodiversity, pressures (such as invasive plants and animals, fragmentation and fire intervals), and the level of management intervention for each conservation area. It is also not possible to currently assess the condition of offsets or their effectiveness in providing the outcomes required that ensure no net loss of biodiversity has occurred following land development. Such assessment will likely take many years, particularly given that management interventions need to be undertaken over long periods of time to achieve the desired ecosystem and biodiversity outcomes. The ACT Government is undertaking a Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program (CEMP) to provide an ecosystem condition monitoring framework for the ACT. The CEMP will evaluate the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation outcomes. The CEMP reports will be undertaken every 4 years for 8 ACT ecosystems including: • upland and lowland native grasslands • upland and lowland woodlands • upland and lowland forests • aquatic and riparian • upland bogs and fens. The results of the CEMP will enable an assessment of the condition of conservation areas, and the ecosystems they contain, in future ACT State of the Environment reports. CONSERVATION EFFECTIVENESS MONITORING PROGRAM (CEMP) Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate The CEMP is a framework for monitoring the condition of ecosystems in the ACT. The CEMP framework is based on an adaptive management approach and is an important tool that evaluates the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation outcomes. Through CEMP, eight ecosystem condition monitoring plans will be developed. These ecosystems are: • upland and lowland native grasslands • upland and lowland woodlands • upland and lowland forests • aquatic and riparian • bogs, fens and wetlands. To assess the condition of an ecosystem, CEMP uses indicators for biodiversity values as well as for threatening processes. For each indicator, a baseline condition, reference condition (commonly thought of as pre-European condition), and a target condition (practical condition for management to strive for when reference condition is either unattainable or unknown) are defined to form the basis of condition assessments. Key outcomes from CEMP include recommendations for monitoring programs, management actions and future research within the ecosystem. These outcomes are then used to inform on-the-ground actions through management, research and operational plans, completing the adaptive management cycle. 229 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator B3: Representation of threatened species and ecological communities in conservation areas ACT’s conservation areas contribute to the National Reserve System (NRS).11 The NRS is Australia’s network of protected areas, designed to conserve Australia’s remaining biodiversity. To ensure that the ACT’s reserve system meets the standards for comprehensiveness, adequacy and representativeness, it is essential that conservation areas protect the range of ecosystem types and biodiversity present in the region. This includes both threatened and common species and ecological communities. Threatened fauna: representation in conservation areas Figure 9 shows the reservation of known and potential habitat for threatened terrestrial fauna.12 Bird species are excluded from the assessment due to the lack of data required to assess protection.13 Four threatened species have all, or close to all, of their known and potential habitat in ACT conservation areas (includes reserves and other PCS-managed land); these are the Broad-toothed Rat, Greater Glider, Northern Corroboree Frog, and Smoky Mouse. The Pink-tailed Worm-lizard and Spotted-tailed Quoll also have significant proportions of their known and potential habitat in ACT conservation areas at 80% and 70% respectively. Threatened fauna with less than 50% of their known and potential habitat in ACT conservation areas include the Perunga Grasshopper (47%), Golden Sun Moth (44%), Striped Legless Lizard (33%), and Grassland Earless Dragon (25%). However, these species have a substantial proportion of their habitat on national land (between 20% and 50%). Management of threatened species on national lands is undertaken by the National Capital Authority as required under the EPBC Act.14 15 11 Department of the Environment and Energy, National Reserve System, found at https://www.environment.gov.au/land/nrs 12 Habitat assessment is based on single records, known habitat and modelled habitat. 13 Bird sightings data is available through annual reporting by the Canberra Ornithologists Group and from Canberra Nature Map. However, for this assessment, comprehensive data on roosting areas as well as feeding areas is required. Data on sightings alone is not sufficient to determine if all the required habitat is protected for these mobile species who may utilise a range of habitats over a wide area. 14 Sharp S., 2016, Ecological Management Plan for National Capital Authority Conservation Areas. Report to the National Capital Authority, Canberra. 15 Ecosure, 2019, Commonwealth Park Grey-Headed Flying-fox Camp Management Plan, Proposal to National Capital Authority, Burleigh Heads. The Grey-headed Flying Fox has no habitat in ACT conservation areas with two recently established colonies occurring in Commonwealth Park (national land) and at Lake Ginninderra (urban open space). Threatened species with substantial proportions (20% or higher) of their known and potential habitat on non-reserved land (outside both ACT-reserved and national land) include the Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (20%), Spotted-tailed Quoll (27%), Golden Sun Moth (28%), Perunga Grasshopper (32%) and the Grassland Earless Dragon (33%). Of particular concern is the lack of reserved habitat for the Striped Legless Lizard with 46% of habitat not reserved. For species with large proportions of non-reserved habitat, this is due to their dependence on grassland and woodland habitats which are not as well protected in conservation areas as other ecosystems such as forests (see sections on reservation of flora and ecological communities below). Species listed as threatened in the ACT but not considered for this analysis due to the lack of wild populations include the Eastern Quoll and New Holland Mouse (both reintroduced to Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve), Eastern Bettong (reintroduced to Tidbinbilla and Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve), Southern Brown Bandicoot, and the Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby and Koala (reintroduced to Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve). 230 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Grey-headed Flying Fox Striped Legless Lizard Grassland Earless Dragon Perunga Grasshopper Golden Sun Moth Spotted-tailed Quoll Pink-tailed Worm-lizard Smoky Mouse Northern Corroboree Frog Greater Glider Broad-toothed Rat Reserved land Other Parks and Conservation Service managed land National land Not reserved Figure 9: Reservation of known and potential habitat for threatened terrestrial fauna Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (Conservation Research and ACT Parks and Conservation Service) Notes: 1) Habitat assessment is based on single records, known habitat and modelled habitat. 2) Reserved land is public land under the Territory Plan zoned as Nature Reserve, Wilderness Area, National Park, some Special Purpose Reserves (Tidbinbilla) or Protection of Water (Lower Cotter Catchment). 3) Other land managed by ACT PCS includes additional areas of land managed for nature conservation that are not part of the reserve system, including some Special Purpose Reserves and unleased land. 4) Not reserved land includes all other land not managed for nature conservation, including but not restricted to urban open space, road reserve, some special purpose reserves (recreational reserves), railway reserve, cemeteries, horse paddocks, private lease and other unleased land not managed for nature conservation. 5) National land is land owned by the Commonwealth and not under the jurisdiction of the ACT Government. 16 Distribution is potential expected distribution of these species. Data is not actual surveyed distribution or historic distribution. For example, Silver Perch have no wild current distribution in the ACT. Aquatic fauna: representation in conservation areas Potential habitat for threatened aquatic fauna is well represented in ACT conservation areas, as most of the major rivers in the ACT are included in reserves. It should be noted that the majority of threatened aquatic fauna are mostly restricted to reserves, and that terrestrial reserve systems do not always adequately support the conservation of aquatic species. For example, dams within terrestrial reserve networks can impact on aquatic ecology values. In addition, the Murrumbidgee Reserves in the ACT are often places for high intensity recreation which can also impact on aquatic species, especially as recreation tends to be situated around large, deep pool habitats such as Kambah Pool and Casuarina Sands. Such habitats are not common and are likely to form key refuges for aquatic species during low flow periods, droughts and climate change scenarios. All of the ACT-listed aquatic species have around 90% to 100% of their potential distribution in conservation areas (Figure 10).16 Silver Perch, while listed as a threatened species in the ACT, is found in Googong Dam and the Queanbeyan River in NSW but has no wild distribution in the ACT. Macquarie 231 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Perch currently occurs only within reserves although attempts have been made to translocate the species to other areas. Although the Murray Cod is not listed as a threatened species under ACT legislation, it is managed as such due to its listing as vulnerable under the EPBC Act. Only 55% of the Murray Cod’s potential distribution in the ACT is in the reserve system. Wild populations of 17 EPSDD, 2017, Native Species Conservation Plan, Murray Cod (Maccullochella peelii), ACT Government, Canberra. Murray Cod exist in the Murrumbidgee River, including within the various reserves along the river, and have been identified as an important population in the National Recovery Plan for the Murray Cod.17 Murray Cod also occur in the Molonglo River and are stocked in Canberra’s urban lakes which would not naturally support the species – this accounts for the relatively low representation in reserves. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Murray Cod Macquarie Perch Trout Cod Murray River Crayfish Two-spined Blackfish Figure 10: Potential distribution of threatened aquatic fauna in ACT conservation areas Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (Conservation Research and ACT Parks and Conservation Service) Notes: This data reflects the potential expected distribution of threatened aquatic fauna species, not actual surveyed distribution or historic distribution. The majority of species are currently known only from reserves. Threatened flora: representation in conservation areas There are 605 records in the ACT Protected Plants Database of the 13 threatened plant species listed in the ACT. Data on threatened plants is collected from targeted surveys undertaken by the ACT Government and from citizen science records provided through Canberra Nature Map. Over half of the known threatened plant sites in the ACT (349 or 58%) are located in reserves or on other land managed by the ACT PCS (Figure 11). An additional 118 (20%) occur on national land, which is managed by the National Capital Authority, and 138 (23%) occur outside both ACT-reserved and national lands, in areas such as urban open space, road reserves, railway reserves and cemeteries. Threatened flora species with a substantial proportion of known locations outside ACT conservation areas include: • Black Gum (Eucalyptus aggregata): the main and only natural population in the ACT occurs on public land managed as part of Kowen Forest. No management plan exists for this population but the area has been fenced off to allow for the natural regeneration of the trees and plantings may be undertaken in the future. • Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides) occurs mainly on national land. 232 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report • Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum) persists only at Hall Cemetery. The cemetery is public land and has a management plan focused on conserving the orchid population. • Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis): Mount Majura and Mount Ainslie Nature Reserves support significant populations of this species, but it also occurs on land owned by the Department of Defence in the Majura Valley. The Department of Defence has management plans in place for the conservation of this species. • Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta): the main ACT population is within a fenced-off area in the Mount Taylor Nature Reserve, and • Murrumbidgee Bossiaea (Bossaiea grayi) occurs along the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo Rivers, some have not been found again in the field since the 2003 fires. It should be noted that records of locations in non-reserved areas may be historic, are no longer occurring, or have poor location accuracy. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Tarengo Leek Orchid (12) Ginninderra Peppercress (29) Button Wrinklewort (177) Black Gum (8) Murrumbidgee Bossiaea (39) Canberra Spider Orchid (211) Small Purple Pea (24) Pale Pomaderris (59) Austral Toadflax (16) Tuggeranong Lignum (20) Baeuerlen's Gentian (2) Brindabella Midge Orchid (7) Kiandra Greenhood (1) Reserved land Other Parks and Conservation Service managed land National land Not reserved Figure 11: Percentage representation of threatened plant locations in conservation areas Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (Conservation Research and ACT Parks and Conservation Service) Notes: 1) Data taken from records in the ACT Protected Plants Database. Number next to plant name is the number of plant records. 2) Data is based on incidental sightings, no analysis of survey effort is reflected in this data (e.g. urban areas and road reserves are more likely to have records than remoter places off track). 3) Reserved land is public land under the Territory Plan zoned as Nature Reserve, Wilderness Area, National Park, some Special Purpose Reserves (Tidbinbilla) or Protection of Water (Lower Cotter Catchment). 4) Other Land managed by ACT PCS includes additional areas of land managed for nature conservation that are not part of the reserve system, including some Special Purpose Reserves and unleased land. 5) Not reserved land/Other/Unreserved includes all other land not managed for nature conservation, including but not restricted to urban open space, road reserve, some special purpose reserves (recreational reserves), railway reserve, cemeteries, horse paddocks, private lease and other unleased land not managed for nature conservation. 6) National land is land owned by the Commonwealth and not under the jurisdiction of the ACT Government. 233 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Threatened ecological communities: representation in conservation areas Of the three ecological communities listed as endangered in the ACT, only High Country Bogs and Associated Fens are fully protected in ACT conservation areas (Figure 12). Natural Temperate Grassland has just over half of its known distribution in ACT conservation areas, and Yellow Box/ Red Gum Grassy Woodland has only 30% of its representation reserved. However, both Natural Temperate Grasslands and Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland have substantial proportions of their extent on national land at nearly 30% and 20% 18 Sharp S., 2016, Ecological Management Plan for National Capital Authority Conservation Areas. Report to the National Capital Authority, Canberra. respectively. Although this land is not managed by the ACT Government, threatened communities on ACT national lands are managed for conservation purposes by the National Capital Authority as required under the EPBC Act.18 Despite this, nearly half of the ACT’s Yellow Box/ Red Gum Grassy Woodland is not reserved, and some 20% of Natural Temperate Grasslands are also unreserved. These results are a reflection of the historic and current use of these lands for agriculture and potential urban development. The low levels of reservation add to the pressures on these communities and the species they support. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% High Country Bogs and Associated Fens Natural Temperate Grassland Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland Reserved land Other Parks and Conservation Service managed land National land Not reserved Figure 12: Percentage representation of Endangered Ecological Communities in reserves Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (Conservation Research and ACT Parks and Conservation Service) Notes: 1) Does not include areas mapped as native grassland that may contain some areas of Natural Temperate Grasslands. 2) Comprises mapped vegetation communities Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box tall grassy woodland and Yellow Box + Apple Box tall grassy woodland, not all of which will meet the condition threshold required to be assigned to the Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland Endangered Ecological Communities. Greater Glider. Source: Ryan Colley. 234 05 Indicators, condition and trends © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Vegetation classes and communities: representation in conservation areas Figure 13 shows the percentage of selected vegetation classes protected in conservation areas. All classes occur in the ACT’s reserve estate with 8 having more than 80% of their extent protected, and another 2 with over 60% of their extent protected. The most under-represented vegetation class was Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands which only has 30% of its extent in conservation areas. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands Upper Riverina Dry Sclerophyll Forests Tableland Clay Grassy Woodlands Southern Tableland Dry Sclerophyll Forests Temperate Montane Grasslands Eastern Riverine Forests Southern Tableland Wet Sclerophyll Forests Subalpine Woodlands Montane Wet Sclerophyll Forests Alpine Heaths Alpine Herbfields Figure 13: Proportion of selected vegetation classes reserved in ACT conservation areas Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Based on Keith Class level classifications of structural formations separated by dominant overstorey species. Figure 14 shows the least-protected vegetation communities, those with under 50% of their extent protected in conservation areas. These woodland, grassland and open forest communities are the least represented in the ACT’s conservation areas. The low levels of protection for these communities, and for the Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands vegetation class, are again the result of the historic and current use of these communities for agriculture and potential urban development. The low levels of reservation add to the pressures on these communities and the species they support. 235 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% Red Stringybark—Broad-leaved Peppermint Native grassland Red Box tall grass–shrub woodlands Snow Gum grassy mid–high woodland Yellow Box ± Apple Box tall grassy woodland Figure 14: Proportion of selected vegetation communities reserved in ACT conservation areas Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Native grassland does not include Natural Temperate Grasslands. 19 Barrett T. and J. Love, 2012, Fine Scale Modelling of Fauna Habitat and Connectivity Values in the ACT Region, prepared for Conservation Planning and Research, EPSDD, ACT Government, Canberra Indicator B4: Extent and condition of native vegetation Native vegetation is integral to ecosystem services such as the protection of biodiversity, protection of water quality and soil health, and sequestration of carbon. Declines in the extent and quality of native vegetation have profound implications for the health of the ecosystem. The loss of vegetation is considered to be the main threat to biodiversity in Australia. Historic land clearing for agriculture and urban development has produced a legacy of fragmented native vegetation in some areas of the ACT. The diversity and resilience of ecological communities relate directly to their spatial configuration, patch size, contiguity, condition and connectivity. Fragmented landscapes prevent the movement of species, limiting opportunities for mating and dispersal, and potentially creating genetic isolation. Research suggests that most animals of southern Australian woodlands and forests will not usually cross a canopy gap of more than 100 metres, and will not travel more than 1.1 kilometres from a patch of at least 10 hectares of suitable living habitat.19 Although large-scale clearing is not an issue in the ACT, native vegetation remains under continuing pressure from urban expansion. Native vegetation in conservation areas has not been extensively cleared and is more intact than native vegetation on private land and those lands separated by urban developments. In these largely intact landscapes, vegetation communities are more likely to be resilient to natural disturbances such as fire and drought. In fragmented landscapes, native vegetation remnants are more vulnerable to natural disturbance as well as pressures arising from agriculture and residential activities. This results in the decline of vegetation, or being at risk of decline, in extent, quality and regenerative capacity. Declining vegetation quality is now a key driver of vegetation loss in the ACT. Fragmentation can also exacerbate the impacts of land use change and climate change by restricting opportunities for fauna to migrate or adapt. It was not possible to determine changes in the extent of native vegetation over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19) for inclusion in this report. Nor was it possible to provide an overall assessment of vegetation condition. 236 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The 2015 ACT State of the Environment report noted that comprehensive documented information on the condition of vegetation and the amount of clearing undertaken was lacking.20 The cumulative impact of approved clearing of vegetation had also not been documented or assessed. These issues limit the ability to report on vegetation extent and condition changes in the ACT. However, aspects of vegetation condition assessments have been undertaken in the ACT including studies of dieback, riparian connectivity, tolerable fire intervals and growth stage, and the condition of grassland and woodland endangered ecological communities (see section on Condition of native vegetation). Extent of native vegetation Native vegetation losses are estimated to be small and mainly due to land use change from urban development. Urban development is likely to be an increasing pressure on native vegetation and may have major impacts on vegetation and ecosystem health, as well as the ecosystem services they provide. It is important that there is consideration of the cumulative impacts of small modifications to habitat, because these can lead to thresholds being crossed unknowingly and unintentionally for at least some aspects of vegetation and ecosystem health. Most of the ACT’s vegetation loss has been from historic clearing and ecosystem modification for agriculture and urban development. Although there has not been a comprehensive assessment of the native vegetation extent in the ACT before European settlement, there are some examples of significant losses. For example, before European settlement, Natural Temperate Grasslands were thought to cover over 25,000 hectares or 11% of the ACT area,21 but today they only cover around 1,100 hectares, less than 1% of the ACT (Figure 15). 20 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2015, ACT State of the Environment Report 2015, ACT Government, Canberra. 21 Gellie, N. J. H., 2005, ‘Native Vegetation of the Southern Forests: South-east Highlands, Australian Alps, South-west Slopes, and SE Corner Bioregions’, Cunninghamia, 9(2): 219–54. 22 Gellie, N. J. H., 2005, ‘Native Vegetation of the Southern Forests: South-east Highlands, Australian Alps, South-west Slopes, and SE Corner Bioregions’, Cunninghamia, 9(2): 219–54. For Lowland Box Gum Woodlands, the pre-European settlement distribution was thought to be over 47,000 hectares or 20% of the ACT area,22 but these woodlands now only cover some 11,500 hectares, around 5% of the ACT (Figure 16). Most of the native vegetation changes are thought to be on lowlands due to the abundance of grass and absence of dense trees for agriculture, and later for urban development. It is estimated that there has been little change in the distribution of upland vegetation types. While the loss of native vegetation remains of concern for urban development, it is unlikely to be the largest source of native vegetation change in the ACT. Chronic degradation of habitat condition, mainly in fragmented landscapes is a significant problem in the ACT. This degradation is compounded by climate change impacts such as decreasing rainfall and higher temperatures. Such degradation has led to an increased occurrence of dieback in the ACT (see section on Condition of native vegetation). 237 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 15: Current grassland extent compared with estimated pre-European settlement grassland extent. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 238 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 16: Current Box Gum Woodland extent compared with estimated pre-European settlement Box Gum Woodland extent. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 239 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Revegetation in the ACT The ACT Government has undertaken extensive revegetation over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19). This has been undertaken in cooperation with various organisations and programs including the Australian Government’s million Trees Project, Greening Australia, and the Australian Government’s Clean Energy Future Biodiversity Fund. The works will provide vegetation corridors, riparian restoration and bank stabilisation, woodland restoration, and post-fire rehabilitation. Restoration of habitat and connectivity increases effective habitat size and access for native species, enables migration and movement to avoid temporary stressors, and aids the recovery potential and recolonisation of degraded areas. Between 2015 and 2019, revegetation included planting of: • nearly 75,000 tube stock and 20 kilograms of native seed to revegetate nearly 1,100 hectares in the Murrumbidgee River Corridor nature reserves and other areas of public lands. • nearly 25,000 tube stock and 180 kilograms of native seed to restore habitat in former pine plantations and other degraded areas in the Lower Cotter Catchment. In addition, there were revegetation activities on some 1,500 hectares of private land between 2015 and 2018, mainly through works undertaken by Greening Australia. See Chapter 3 Community leadership in sustainability and science for more information. These revegetation activities will increase native vegetation extent and improve the condition of ecosystems in the future. 23 Cowood A.L. et al., 2018, Blakely’s Red Gum Dieback in the ACT, Report to Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra, Canberra. Condition of native vegetation Dieback Dieback is the gradual deterioration of health in trees, sometimes leading to tree death, and is usually caused by a combination of factors including disease and pathogens, insect attack, and additional drought and temperature stress from climate change. While dieback affects many species in the ACT (including Eucalyptus viminalis, E. bridgesiana and E. melliodora), recent observations have recognised a significant increase in the incidence of dieback in Blakely’s Red Gum (E. blakelyi). Dieback of Blakely’s Red Gum appears to affect any age class and is occurring across rural landscapes, urban environments and reserves within the ACT. High rates of mortality in younger trees have resulted in a lack of successful maturation across the ACT landscape. If younger trees are unable to replace the older, dying trees, the population will slowly thin out. A great deal of uncertainty surrounds the cause of Blakely’s Red Gum dieback in the ACT and is thought to be the result of a number of stress-inducing factors, impacts associated with climate change and reduced resilience within the landscape. The ACT Government and the University of Canberra has been undertaking research to better understand the causes and occurrence of red gum dieback in the ACT.23 Main findings include: • confirmation that Blakely’s Red Gum is currently experiencing dieback across the ACT (Figure 17). • Yellow Box is experiencing an increase in condition and suitability to future projected climates. • climate change and the compounded effects of an increasing temperature and variable precipitation over time is causing stress in trees and impacting their growth, and • revegetation is needed to improve landscape connectivity and also assist dispersal to areas of climate refugia and distribution expansion. 240 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 17: Temporal condition mapping of Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi) as at 2017. Source: Cowood A.L. et al., 2018, Blakely’s Red Gum Dieback in the ACT, Report to Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra, Canberra. 241 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Riparian connectivity Decline in connectivity within riparian areas is primarily due to historic clearing of vegetation for agriculture and urban development. Low river flow conditions, climate change impacts (higher temperatures, increased drought and storm events), drought and fire also impact on riparian vegetation causing loss of habitat and increased disconnection within riparian areas. Riparian connectivity has been assessed for the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo Rivers in the ACT. Main findings include: • significant areas of riparian vegetation on the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo Rivers have poor connectivity. • 58% of surveyed riparian vegetation on the Molonglo River was found to have high to very high connectivity, compared to 45% for the Murrumbidgee River (Figures 18 and 19). • the Murrumbidgee River had a higher proportion of riparian vegetation with low and poor connectivity at 36% of the area assessed, compared to 22% for the Molonglo River. • areas of the Murrumbidgee River and lower Molonglo River that fall outside reserved areas generally showed very low levels of connectivity. This was particularly the case for the Murrumbidgee River which had 32% of low and poor connectivity inside reserves, compared to nearly 80% outside reserves (Figure 20). • areas with poorest riparian connectivity include Molonglo River immediately below Scrivener Dam, Murrumbidgee River within Stony Creek Nature Reserve and the Lanyon Landscape Conservation area, and • several areas with extensive riparian habitat and smaller pockets that should be maintained include the Murrumbidgee River at Gigerline Nature Reserve, downstream areas of the Bullen Range Nature Reserve, Woodstock Nature Reserve (particularly adjacent to the mouth of the Molonglo River and downstream areas), and Uriarra Creek within Swamp Creek Nature Reserve. For the Molonglo River, areas within the Molonglo River Reserve should be maintained. Poor (6%) Moderate (20%) High (22%) Very High (36%) Low (16%) Figure 18: Connectivity of riparian vegetation along the Molonglo River Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Based on a proximity index which assesses the area-weighted measure of the distance between vegetation patches. This analysis uses three vegetation riparian-dependent vegetation communities: Ribbon Gum Very Tall Woodland, River She-oak Riparian Forest, and River Bottlebrush–Burgan rocky riparian tall shrubland. 242 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Poor (17%) Moderate (19%) High (18%) Very High (27%) Low (19%) Figure 19: Connectivity of riparian vegetation along the Murrumbidgee River Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Based on a proximity index which assesses the area-weighted measure of the distance between vegetation patches. This analysis uses three vegetation riparian-dependent vegetation communities: Ribbon Gum Very Tall Woodland, River She-oak Riparian Forest, and River Bottlebrush–Burgan rocky riparian tall shrubland. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Connectivity non-reserve Connectivity reserve Poor Percentage of total riparian area Low Moderate High Very High Figure 20: Connectivity of riparian vegetation along the Murrumbidgee River Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Based on a proximity index which assesses the area-weighted measure of the distance between vegetation patches. This analysis uses three vegetation riparian-dependent vegetation communities: Ribbon Gum Very Tall Woodland, River She-oak Riparian Forest, and River Bottlebrush–Burgan rocky riparian tall shrubland. 243 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Condition of grassland and woodland endangered ecological communities The ACT Government has been monitoring the condition of Box Gum Woodland and Natural Temperate Grassland endangered ecological communities since 2009. Results to date show the following trends: • Although the trend in native plant species richness differs significantly between Woodlands, Natural Temperate Grasslands and Secondary Grasslands, all vegetation formations have displayed an increase in native plant species richness since monitoring commenced in 2009. • Woodland native species richness peaked in 2014 but has since seen a slight overall decline, possibly due to drought conditions experienced in 2018. • Grassland species richness has continued to improve since surveys commenced. • There has been an average increase of 1.4 rare species per survey plot per decade for the three vegetation formations. This suggests that Box Gum Woodland and Natural Temperate Grasslands are becoming more floristically diverse. • Native grass cover across all vegetation formations has been declining since 2012. This decline does not appear to be linked to drought. More analysis is required to determine if it is linked to management practices. The decline in this indicator is of concern because it has implications for fauna habitat and for weed invasion. • There has been a slight increase in exotic species richness across Box Gum Woodland and Natural Temperate Grassland. This trend is partly due to the decline of native grass cover that provides more opportunities for exotic species to establish themselves. There is evidence that the increase in exotic species richness has declined since a high in 2012, but it is not known if this more recent trend can be attributed to management. Overall the long term condition is positive with Box Gum Woodland and Natural Temperate Grassland endangered ecological communities in the ACT becoming more diverse. However, it is clear that short-term variations are having an impact on grass cover and the number of exotic species. Ongoing monitoring and development of management practices will be important to maintain these important communities. 244 05 Indicators, condition and trends © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: GRASSLAND RESTORATION PROJECT Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service 24 Hodgkinson, K.C., 2014, Condition of Selected Natural Temperate Grassland Sites in Urban and Peri-urban Canberra, final report to the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, ACT Government, Canberra. Natural Temperate Grassland is one of the most threatened natural plant communities in Australia with less than 1% of the original extent estimated to remain. Before European settlement, these grasslands were thought to cover 11% of the ACT area, but today they occupy less than 1%. This ecosystem was sought after for the abundance of grass and absence of trees for agriculture, and later for urban development. Not only are the remaining grasslands greatly reduced in area, they are highly fragmented (confined to 38 small and isolated patches in the ACT), often degraded, and face ongoing threats such as the spread of exotic plant species, and by human activity such as land use change.24 Despite this, the ACT has some of the largest, best quality and most connected patches of Natural Temperate Grassland remaining in south-eastern Australia, with most of these protected in nature reserves. However, protection alone will not be enough to conserve their unique biodiversity, which has evolved with frequent disturbance from both fire and grazing. In the absence of these disturbances, plant biomass can accumulate, leading to weed invasion, reduced cover of native grasses, decline in productivity, loss of plant diversity, and simplification of grass structure. Fire has been largely absent across ACT grasslands for the past 50 years. Small-scale burns undertaken by the Ginninderra Catchment Group and the ACT Parks and Conservation Service have shown that fire could improve ecological values, but there remain many unknowns about the impact of fire on certain plant communities and threatened fauna. To further explore the role of fire in grassland restoration and management, the Grasslands Restoration Project was established in 2015. This large-scale and long-term project is a joint venture between the ACT Government and the National Landcare Program. The project involves the application of fire and the monitoring of outcomes for grassland health at seven important grassland reserves. Burns are conducted to minimise impact on threatened fauna and maximise biodiversity response. The burns were undertaken in partnership with the Murumbung Rangers. Since the commencement of the project, the following outcomes have been achieved: • some 250 hectares of grasslands of variable quality have been burnt, with burn areas ranging from 5 to 15 hectares. • vegetation monitoring has been undertaken in 140 locations, assessing some 1,702 monitoring plots. • 310 plant species have been found, including 188 native species and 122 exotic species, and • 156 reptile monitoring sites have been established with 14 species found. In response to fire, the following has been observed: • fire increased native plant richness up to 69% within 2 years. • the diversity and abundance of weeds increased 6 to 12 months following a fire, indicating the need for further eradication work. • the Grassland Earless Dragon recolonised patches of previously unoccupied habitat following burns. • the abundance of the Striped Legless Lizard declined in the first 12 months after fire but later showed recovery. • spring fires can be used effectively to reduce annual grass abundance, and • the use of mosaic burning creates refuges for fauna after the burn. The Grasslands Restoration Project has enabled grassland managers to significantly increase their knowledge and expertise in the application of ecological burns for positive ecosystem outcomes. Further work on the outcomes of fire frequency, and the longer-term impacts of fire on plant and animal communities, will increase this knowledge and improve the health of ACT Natural Temperate Grasslands in the future. Natural Temperate Grassland in the Jerrabomberra Valley, ACT. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. 245 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: ACT WOODLAND RESEARCH AND RESTORATION Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service The ACT and Australian governments have contributed $3.1 million for the ACT and Greater Goorooyarroo woodlands restoration project (2012–2017) to consolidate and connect 60,000 hectares of the largest remaining Yellow Box– Blakely’s Red Gum woodland landscape in Australia. Activities include: • improving woodland habitat connectivity • enhancing woodland habitat, for example, by adding coarse woody debris and a shrub layer • improving landscape scale conservation • implementing research outcomes, and • encouraging community participation, including 43 community groups, schools and organisations and 18 rural landholders. Achievements include: • over 900 hectares of revegetation, including 28,548 tube stocks planted and 101 kilometres of direct seeding • enhancement and protection of 844 hectares of remnant woodland (including the distribution of 4,415 tonnes of coarse woody debris) • invasive species control over an area of 4,494 hectares • feral animal control over an area of 9,555 hectares, and • establishment of 10 monitoring sites to review different treatment types and techniques. Activities towards restoring woodland areas as part of environmental offset requirements have been undertaken at Isaacs Ridge, Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Areas and Justice Robert Hope Park. Activities include, but are not limited to, weed and pest animal monitoring and control, monitoring threatened species and the endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum woodland, the addition of coarse woody debris, kangaroo monitoring and control, and revegetation. The Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment Since 2004, Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo nature reserves have been the focus of a long-term research partnership between the ACT Government, the Australian National University, the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust, CSIRO and others to better understand and rehabilitate the structure and function of Box Gum woodland ecosystems. The Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment is aimed at developing a whole-of-ecosystem understanding of Box Gum grassy woodlands with a focus on restoring structure and function to increase biodiversity. The partnership aims to inform evidence-based conservation management in the ACT. Conservation treatments to date include: • construction of a large pest-proof enclosure encompassing 485 hectares of Box Gum woodland using 11 kilometres of rabbit, cat and fox-proof fencing • replenishing fallen timber habitat • excluding kangaroos from certain areas • trialling fire regimes • removing introduced predators, and • reintroducing locally extinct fauna, including ‘ecosystem engineers’ such as the Eastern Bettong (Bettongia gaimardi). Responses in the woodland biodiversity are monitored, including surveys of vegetation and fauna, research on arthropod assemblages, abundance of ground-dwelling skinks, the impact of kangaroo grazing, and monitoring plots to trial different fire regimes. 246 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Threatened species, such as the Eastern Bettong (Bettongia gaimardi), Eastern Quoll (Dasyurus viverrinus), Bush Stone Curlew (Burhinus grallarius), Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus) and New Holland Mouse (Pseudomys novaehollandiae), have been reintroduced into the Mulligans Flat Sanctuary after many decades of local extinction with differing levels of success. There are plans to reintroduce Yellow-Footed Antechinus (Antechinus flavipes) and Eastern Chestnut Mouse (Pseudomys nanus) in the future. The sanctuary was extended in 2019 to include an additional 801 hectares of Box Gum Grassy Woodland surrounded by a predator-proof fence directly south of the Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary. Feral animals such rabbits, hares, foxes and cats are currently being removed before planned reintroductions of native species takes place. Eastern Quoll (Dasyurus viverrinus), Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve. Photo: Adrian Manning. Researchers fitting a collar onto an Eastern Bettong (Bettongia gaimardi), Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve. Photo: Don Fletcher. Release of an Eastern Bettong at Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve. Photo: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 247 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Impacts of fire on native vegetation Bushfire is an important occurrence for many native vegetation communities in the ACT. Although fire can cause a temporary loss of vegetation, fire is necessary for the regeneration and regrowth of many plant species. The appropriate fire regime to promote native biodiversity (intensity, frequency, season, extent and type of fire) varies between native vegetation communities. Changes to ecologically appropriate natural fire regimes can have significant impacts on the composition of vegetation communities and the ecosystems they support. The ACT’s fire regimes have changed over time due to increased human sources of ignition, the suppression of natural fire to protect human life and assets, and prescribed burning practices for the management of fuel loads (see section 5.7 Fire). In addition, periods of prolonged drought and higher temperatures increase the risk of more frequent and severe fires. Climate change is expected to further influence the occurrence of bushfires in the ACT. TOLERABLE FIRE INTERVALS Tolerable fire intervals (TFI) assess the likely ecological response of native vegetation communities to subsequent fire and are based on the requirements for sensitive plant species and key habitat elements. Assessments of TFI are based on: • Minimum TFI: the minimum period of time between fires to avoid a loss of plant biodiversity. This period is based on the time it takes fire-sensitive plant species to grow to reproductive maturity and produce adequate viable seed banks. Frequent burning below minimum TFI can lead to localised loss of these fire-sensitive species, and can also prevent the development of key habitat features required by some fauna such as mature overstorey, tree hollows, and the accumulation of leaf litter and logs. • Maximum TFI: the maximum period of time between fires to avoid a loss of plant biodiversity. Native vegetation communities not exposed to fire for extended periods can have reduced viability of shorter lived plant species which require fire to germinate seeds. Lack of fire may also result in a decline of key habitat features required by some fauna species such as dense mid-storey vegetation. Minimum and maximum TFI are ecosystem-specific and are typically longer for vegetation communities that have evolved with less frequent fire, for example those occurring in cooler and moister environments where fires are naturally less frequent and where the growth rates of plants is slower. It should be noted that the TFI status is only a potential issue should a large, high-severity fire occur in areas that are below minimum TFI. There is no requirement that ecosystems be within a specific TFI, only that fire outside of these thresholds be limited. To promote maximum biodiversity, a range of TFI status is required to provide different habitat resources. In 2018, only 34% of the total area of native vegetation assessed was found to be within the required TFI to maintain vegetation communities; 53% was below minimum TFI (fire interval too short to maintain vegetation in its optimal state), 7% above the maximum TFI (fire interval too long to maintain vegetation in its optimal state), and 6% was classed as long unburnt (Figures 21 and 22). Because over 50% of the total native vegetation assessed is below TFI, large areas of the ACT will remain outside optimal TFI irrespective of the level of prescribed burning and future fire events. This potentially places species with life cycles dependent on long inter-fire intervals at increased risk. For the 10 native vegetation communities assessed, only 4 had 50% or more of their assessable area within the preferred TFI range (Figure 23). These are the Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands (58%), Upper Riverina Dry Sclerophyll Forests (70%), Southern Tableland Dry Sclerophyll Forests (77%), and Tableland Clay Grassy Woodlands (89%). Five native vegetation communities had none of their assessable area within TFI, and one only has 3% within TFI. These communities had fire regimes mostly below minimum TFI, the exception being the Temperate Montane Grasslands which had 60% of the assessed area above maximum TFI. Other communities with high proportions of above maximum TFI include the Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands (39%) and Upper Riverina Dry Sclerophyll Forests (28%). 248 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The TFI assessment also showed the following trends: • Extensive areas of the ACT uplands are below minimum TFI as a result of the 2003 Canberra bushfires which burnt some 90% of the Namadgi National Park. These upland ecosystems typically have longer minimum TFI and are still in an early recovery stage. • In contrast, many areas of the ACT lowlands and on the lower margins of the uplands are within TFI or above maximum TFI. These areas either escaped 2003 bushfire and/or are communities that recover more quickly from fire. • Much of the above maximum TFI in the northeast of the ACT are native grasslands which have a short minimum TFI and in which little burning has occurred in recent decades. • Long unburnt areas are those areas in the Namadgi National Park that have had no recorded fire but support vegetation communities that were otherwise extensively impacted by the 2003 bushfire throughout the rest of park. Most of the long unburnt ecosystems in Namadgi National Park are restricted to the very southern portion on the NSW border. These areas therefore represent rare post-fire age classes for some vegetation communities and exclusion of fire in the foreseeable future is a particularly high conservation priority while other areas of these communities recover from the 2003 fires. Long Unburnt (6%) Below minimum TFI (53%) Within TFI (34%) Above maximum TFI (7%) Figure 21: Percentage area of assessed vegetation communities by tolerable fire interval status, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Assessed using Keith Class level. Post-fire status of native vegetation communities is based on prescribed fire and bushfire history up to the end of 2018. Fire history records nominally begin in 1900 but are more reliable from 2003 onwards. 249 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 22: Distribution of tolerable fire interval status for selected native vegetation communities in the ACT, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Assessed using Keith Class level. Post fire status of native vegetation communities based on prescribed fire and bushfire history up to the end of 2018. Fire history records nominally begin in 1900 but are more reliable in later years from 2003 onwards. Blank areas are either non-native vegetation communities or urban areas. 250 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Southern Tableland Wet Sclerophyll Forests Montane Wet Sclerophyll Forests Eastern Riverine Forests Alpine Heaths Subalpine Woodlands Temperate Montane Grasslands Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands Upper Riverina Dry Sclerophyll Forests Southern Tableland Dry Sclerophyll Forests Tableland Clay Grassy Woodlands Within TFI Below minimum TFI Above maximum TFI Long Unburnt Figure 23: Percentage area of selected native vegetation communities by tolerable fire interval status, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Assessed using Keith Class level. Post-fire status of native vegetation communities is based on prescribed fire and bushfire history up to the end of 2018. Fire history records nominally begin in 1900 but are more reliable from 2003 onwards. GROWTH STAGE Post-fire growth stages represent the recovery of native vegetation communities after fire and the progression from early response (re-sprouting and seed germination) to the maturation of plant species and animal populations, and eventually senescence and species turnover at longer times subsequent to fire. Each growth stage is characterised by a different structural arrangement of vegetation and may be dominated by different component species. Similarly, the faunal community supported by an area will vary as the vegetation progresses through growth stages. Biodiversity values are most likely enhanced at a landscape scale by achieving a range of growth stages within each vegetation community and across the landscape. In 2018, the adolescent growth was the most common growth stage accounting for 44% of the total area of native vegetation communities assessed (Figures 24 and 25). The next most common growth stage was mature at 38% of the total area of native vegetation assessed, with both juvenile and senescent both accounting for 9% each. While all growth stages are represented across the ACT, the landscape is dominated by early and young stages which account for over half of the assessed vegetation communities. For the 13 native vegetation communities assessed, 8 had 50% or more of their assessable area within juvenile or adolescent growth stages (Figure 26). Five of these communities had over 80% of their assessed area in juvenile or adolescent growth stages, including Alpine Bogs and Fens, Alpine Herbfields, Subalpine Woodlands, Southern Tablelands Wet Sclerophyll Forests, and Montane Wet Sclerophyll Forests. Only 4 vegetation communities had greater than 50% of their assessed area within the mature growth stage including Montane Bogs and Fens, Southern Tableland Dry Sclerophyll Forests, Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands, and Upper Riverina Dry Sclerophyll Forests. Native vegetation growth stages across the ACT reflect TFI status, with extensive areas of the uplands being dominated by early and young growth stages. This is a result of the 2003 bushfires and the relatively slow recovery rate of many upland ecosystems. The dominance of early and young growth stages has 251 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report significant implications for biodiversity, especially for fauna that require older growth stages. The growth stage assessment also showed the following trends: • Vegetation communities dominated by early post-fire growth stages include Alpine Bogs and Fens and Alpine Herbfields, and to a lesser extent Montane Bogs and Fens, which grow at lower altitudes and were not as extensively impacted in 2003. • Most other upland ecosystems are also dominated by juvenile and adolescent growth stages including Subalpine Woodlands, Southern Tableland Wet Sclerophyll Forests and Montane Wet Sclerophyll Forests. • Early recovery stages are extensive in parts of the Namadgi National Park which have been subjected to prescribed burning since 2003, primarily as a part of the Regional Fire Management Plan, between 2013 and 2018. • Some lower elevation communities are also dominated by earlier growth stages including the Eastern Riverine Forests and Tableland Clay Grassy Woodlands. • Mature growth stages are more common on the lower elevation eastern and northern margins of the upland where dry forest and woodlands that recover more quickly from fire dominate. • Dry sclerophyll forest communities and Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands have a significant proportion of their extent in mature and senescent growth stages. • Older growth stages are currently rare in the ACT uplands and are known to support different collections of species to ecosystems dominated by younger growth stages. The biodiversity these areas support is at risk from future bushfires because of the time required to transition from early to later growth stages and to replace slow developing habitat features such as mature trees and tree hollows. • Late post-fire growth stages are primarily distributed in the far south of Namadgi National Park (which escaped the 2003 bushfires and has not been burnt in recorded history) and in the lowland grasslands and woodlands around Canberra. In the longer term, conservation priority needs to focus on diversifying growth stages within and between ecosystems to maximise persistence of biodiversity. In the lowlands, this can be achieved through the ecological burning of late and mature growth stages for vegetation resilient to fire. However, in the uplands achieving growth stage diversity will require time and deliberate protection of the relatively rare older growth stages from prescribed fire and bushfire until more of the landscape reaches post-fire maturity. Juvenile (9%) Adolescent (44%) Mature (38%) Senescent (9%) Figure 24: Percentage area of assessed vegetation communities by growth stage, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Assessed using Keith Class level. Post-fire status of native vegetation communities is based on prescribed fire and bushfire history up to the end of 2018. Fire history records nominally begin in 1900 but are more reliable from 2003 onwards. 252 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 25: Distribution of growth stages for selected native vegetation communities in the ACT, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Assessed using Keith Class level. Post-fire status of native vegetation communities is based on prescribed fire and bushfire history up to the end of 2018. Fire history records nominally begin in 1900 but are more reliable from 2003 onwards. Blank areas are either non-native vegetation communities or urban areas. 253 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Upper Riverina Dry Sclerophyll Forests Southern Tableland Grassy Woodlands Eastern Riverine Forests Southern Tableland Dry Sclerophyll Forests Alpine Heaths Tableland Clay Grassy Woodlands Montane Wet Sclerophyll Forests Southern Tableland Wet Sclerophyll Forests Subalpine Woodlands Temperate Montane Grasslands Montane Bogs and Fens Alpine Herbfields Alpine Bogs and Fens Juvenile Adolescent Mature Senescent Figure 26: Percentage area of selected native vegetation communities by growth stage, as at 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: Assessed using Keith Class level. Post-fire status of native vegetation communities is based on prescribed fire and bushfire history up to the end of 2018. Fire history records nominally begin in 1900 but are more reliable from 2003 onwards. 25 EPSDD, 2016, ACT Biosecurity Strategy 2016–2026, ACT Government, Canberra. Indicator B5: Distribution and abundance of terrestrial invasive plants and animals Invasive plant and animal species are a costly and significant threat to the health of biodiversity and ecosystems in the ACT, as well as a threat to many of the ACT’s endangered species (see Table 1 at the end of the Biodiversity section). In areas where invasive species are dominant, local extinctions of native flora and fauna can occur. They can also prevent the successful reintroduction of native species into otherwise suitable habitat. Exotic pests and diseases such as parasites of fish, dieback fungus (Phytophthora cinnamomi) and myrtle rust are an additional threat to biodiversity, with the potential to affect a wide range of native species. In addition to biodiversity and ecosystem health impacts, invasive species have a negative effect on the region’s agriculture through lost production and management costs, loss of social amenity, and human health. Invasive plants, sometimes called environmental weeds, are one of the most significant threats to biodiversity in the ACT.25 Invasive plants are a main cause of biodiversity loss by displacing native species, modifying habitat and ecological functions, and reducing food availability. Invasive plants can also impact soil and aquatic health, alter stream flows and increase flooding. Invasive animals threaten biodiversity through predation, competition for food and habitat, and modification of ecosystems and ecological functions. Invasive animals can have significant environmental impacts due to soil disturbance from burrowing, grazing, and the action of hard hooves. These promote erosion and can lead to degradation of aquatic ecosystems. The actions of invasive animals are particularly damaging in sensitive ecosystems such as High Country Bogs and Associated Fens. Invasive animals can also spread disease and parasites. Pest plants and animals are not restricted to introduced species (those not indigenous to the ACT region); overabundant native animals such as kangaroos can degrade ecosystem health. Some native species, particularly plants, can also become pests if they become established outside their natural range. Invasive plants and animals require ongoing management to minimise impacts, both on public and private land (see Chapter 3 Community leadership in 254 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report sustainability and science for more information about invasive species management on private land). It is generally not feasible to eradicate widely established invasive species; therefore the goal of management is to reduce numbers to levels where they have no unacceptable impact. This goal is achieved through the monitoring and control of established species, and the detection and eradication of new invasive species before they become established. Prevention and early intervention are often the most cost-effective techniques for managing invasive species. Climate change is likely to modify and increase the threat of invasive plants and animals in the ACT, through extensions of favourable conditions and the availability of new habitat caused by the loss of native species from increased temperatures, drought and fire. It is not possible to monitor the distribution and abundance of all invasive species. Therefore, the monitoring of invasive species concentrates on those known to be causing significant problems or posing significant threats. Invasive plants There are a significant number of invasive species present in the ACT – the 2017 Census of the Flora of 26 Australian National Herbarium, Centre for Australian National Biodiversity Research, 2017, Census of the Flora of the ACT, found at https://www.anbg.gov.au/cpbr/ACT-census-2017/index.html 27 Invasive plant locations and control activities can be found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/parks-conservation/ plants-and-animals/Biosecurity/invasive-plants#control the Australian Capital Territory found 592 introduced plant species, 53 of which were introduced from elsewhere in Australia.26 Known locations of invasive plants are mapped, along with control activities undertaken.27 Data on management activities and outcomes clearly demonstrates the value of invasive plant management to control established populations and to eradicate new outbreaks where possible. Management results also show the risk of invasive plant populations re-establishing themselves in the absence of ongoing control. Most management activity in the ACT focuses on environmental weeds that have high potential for invasiveness and impact. Over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19), 54,000 hectares of invasive plant control was undertaken in the ACT for over 100 invasive plant species. Figure 27 shows the area treated for the 10 invasive species that were most extensively controlled over the period. Serrated tussock accounted for the largest area treated at nearly 14,000 hectares, followed by St. John’s wort (over 10,000 hectares), blackberry (7,700 hectares) and African lovegrass (6,900 hectares). 0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 Paterson's curse Chilean needle grass Radiata pine Nodding thistle Woody weeds Sweet briar African lovegrass Blackberry St. John's wort Serrated tussock 2015–16 Hectares treated 2016–17 2017–18 2018–19 Figure 27: Top ten controlled invasive plants in the ACT, areas treated, 2015–16 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: ACT Parks and Conservation Service In addition to the control of established invasive plants, it is important to detect and control new invasive species. Emerging priority species in the ACT include Fireweed, Coolatai grass, Mexican feather grass and Alligator weed. Early intervention is vital to successful management of these species. These invasive plants can lead to significant degradation of biodiversity and also represent a threat to grazing productivity due to low levels of protein and digestibility. 255 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: THE IMPORTANCE OF INVASIVE PLANT MANAGEMENT IN THE ACT Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate In the absence of management, invasive plants can significantly expand their coverage and negative impact over a short period of time. Figure 28 shows the increase in Chilean needle grass at Crace Grasslands between 2012–2013 and 2015–2016. Without effective ongoing control, the extent of Chilean needle grass more than doubled. Figure 29 shows the increase in African lovegrass infestation at Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve between 2014–2015 and 2017–2018. In the absence of ongoing control, African lovegrass extent more than tripled in the section of the reserve being monitored. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 2015–16 2012–13 Infestation (hectares) Figure 28: Increase in Chilean needle grass infestation at Crace Grasslands Nature Reserve in the absence of ongoing control. Source: Collector for ArcGIS and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 2017–18 2014–15 Infestation (square metres) Figure 29: Increase in African lovegrass infestation at Tuggeranong Hill Nature Reserve in the absence of ongoing control. Source: Collector for ArcGIS and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Effectiveness of control activities in reducing the spread of pest plants AFRICAN LOVEGRASS IN NAMADGI NATIONAL PARK African lovegrass is widespread in the ACT and a significant threat to native plant and animal habitat. It also increases fire risk in the areas it invades. Figure 30 shows the successful control of African lovegrass in Namadgi National Park between 2015 and 2019. Management actions ensured that this pest species was effectively contained during this period. But a slight increase in African lovegrass in 2019 shows the capacity for invasive plants to begin to re-establish after control activities, or in response to environmental changes such as disturbance or drought. Ongoing management is required to keep African lovegrass contained in Namadgi National Park due to the frequent discovery of new infestations. 256 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 Abundant Control area (hectares) Dominant Frequent Occasional Rare Figure 30: African lovegrass control in Namadgi National Park, 2015 to 2019. Source: Collector for ArcGIS and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: The categories of abundant, dominant, frequent, occasional and rare refer to abundance of the African lovegrass at control sites. SERRATED TUSSOCK IN GRASSLANDS AND WOODLANDS Inadequate resourcing for control activities before 2016 resulted in the increased spread of serrated tussock in the ACT’s grasslands and woodlands. Increased control activities in subsequent years demonstrate the benefits of management. Between 2016 and 2019 serrated tussock was brought under control, reducing the threat of further spread and allowing the recovery of native species (Figure 31). 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 Abundant Control area (hectares) Dominant Frequent Occasional Rare Figure 31: Serrated tussock control in grasslands and woodlands Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Notes: The categories of abundant, dominant, frequent, occasional and rare refer to abundance of the Serrated tussock at control sites. 257 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report BLACKBERRY CONTROL IN NAMADGI NATIONAL PARK The photos below show how native plants can recover after control of invasive plants. The blackberry invasion was starting to smother the Dicksonia tree ferns. Careful herbicide use killed the blackberry and saved this tree fern community. The final photo shows native colonising plants filling the space of the dead blackberry. Eventually taller native plants will regenerate at the site. Photo: Blackberry control in wet sclerophyll forest Northern Namadgi National Park. Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 258 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Invasive animals It was not possible to comprehensively determine the distribution and abundance of invasive animals in the ACT for this report. However, records from Canberra Nature Map show the presence of 64 introduced species in the ACT including 17 mammals, 33 birds, 2 lizards, 1 frog and 11 fish (see section 5.6 Water).28 The invasive animal species of most concern in the ACT are feral pigs, deer, foxes, rabbits, horses and wild dogs. Where possible these species are managed with neighbouring land managers to minimise their negative impacts on conservation reserves and surrounding agricultural land. As with invasive plants, the management of mobile and rapid breeding animals such as rabbits requires continuous control to be effective. Ongoing invasive animal control programs currently account for the majority of vertebrate pest management in the ACT. These include feral pigs in Namadgi National Park, rabbits in areas of Canberra Nature Park and Namadgi, as well as wild dogs at the rural/reserve interface. Rabbit control is the most common management undertaken, occurring in all but one reserve. All priority invasive animal species are controlled in Namadgi National Park; other reserves where management of multiple species takes place include the Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve, Murrumbidgee River Corridor, Googong Foreshores, Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve, and Molonglo River Nature Reserve. General trends for selected invasive animal species are shown below. 28 More information on the Canberra Nature Map can be found at https://canberra.naturemapr.org/ Rabbits Rabbits are the most widespread and damaging invasive animal in the ACT, impacting on both natural and rural lands. Rabbits pose a particular threat to native vegetation, as they prevent regeneration by removing seedlings. Loss of native vegetation from rabbit grazing threatens the survival of native birds, small mammals and insects that rely on groundcover plants for food and shelter. The presence of rabbits can sustain fox and feral cat populations then these predators in turn place further pressure on native prey species. Rabbits also cause erosion and weed colonisation. Rabbit numbers have been increasing in the ACT and in all other Australian jurisdictions over the last five years. As with other fast-breeding, mobile invasive species like foxes, effective, sustained management of rabbits relies on coordinated management at the landscape scale to prevent recolonisation from neighbouring, untreated areas. After one or two years of intensive follow-up control, monitoring results show the successful suppression of rabbit populations, but ongoing management is then required to prevent populations from re-establishing themselves. This continuing control has been effective in reducing the densities of rabbits by around 90% in areas of Canberra Nature Park and Namadgi National Park (Figure 32). The rabbit’s propensity to rapidly breed is also shown in Figure 32, with a significant increase in population in 2014, followed by a steep decline in response to effective control programs. Number of rabbits per kilometre 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 1/3/2014 1/3/2012 1/3/2010 1/3/2008 1/3/2006 1/3/2015 1/3/2013 1/3/2017 1/3/2018 1/3/2016 1/3/2011 1/3/2009 1/3/2007 Figure 32: Rabbit abundance at Gudgenby Valley, Namadgi National Park, 2006 to 2018 Source: ACT Parks and Conservation Service 259 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Foxes Foxes are ubiquitous in the ACT but effective management over large areas is constrained by restrictions on the use of 1080 poison close to residential areas, and by limited resources for 1080 poisoning in non-urban reserves. Predation by foxes has been shown to have a devastating impact on native fauna, causing local extinctions of vulnerable native species. For example, the ACT’s Scientific Committee has advised that foxes were responsible for the loss of Bettongs released in the Lower Cotter Catchment between 2015 and 2017, with most dying shortly after release. The committee has also advised against future wild releases unless fox numbers can be significantly reduced. This shows the successful restoration of some native animals is dependent on the effective control of invasive species. Horses Feral horses within Namadgi National Park damage sensitive subalpine wetlands and bogs, which provide habitat for the rare and endangered Northern Corroboree Frog (see Case study: High Country Bogs and Associated Fens). Feral horse management along the south-western border region over the last decade has resulted in the ACT currently being free of resident feral horse populations. The last feral horse was removed in 2011. Management in this region now focuses on surveillance and prevention to detect and control feral horses. Responding promptly has proven successful to prevent feral horses returning to the ACT. Feral horse management is likely to become more important in the future, particularly for the protection of Namadgi National Park alpine wetlands and water catchment. This is due to the NSW Government’s decision to grant feral horses Heritage status and only allowing non-lethal methods for their removal. This will likely lead to an increase in feral horse populations and result in higher numbers moving into the ACT from NSW. If the feral horse population in Namadgi is permitted to grow and expand its range, there will be increasing damage to sensitive ecosystems, with deleterious consequences for biodiversity.29 Deer Deer have the potential to cause significant environmental damage, as well as affecting agricultural productivity and social amenity. They can be particularly destructive to sensitive alpine bogs and fens (see Case study: High Country Bogs and Associated Fens). Deer are an emerging invasive species in the ACT and are common across eastern NSW and other parts of Australia. Three species of 29 ACT Department of Territory and Municipal Services, 2015, Feral Horse Management, ACT Government, Canberra. feral deer, Fallow (Dama dama), Red (Cervus elaphus) and Sambar (Rusa unicolor) are widespread in the ACT. Although these species have been present in low numbers in the territory for a considerable period, there has been an increase to the known range and distribution of all three species in recent years. Deer management poses a challenge to public and private land managers due to the animals’ cryptic and wary behaviour. To assess the effectiveness and feasibility of managing high priority emerging deer populations, the ACT Government has implemented several pilot management programs including: • ground shooting of Fallow Deer at Googong Foreshores, and areas of the Murrumbidgee River Corridor • ground shooting Sambar Deer in the Upper Cotter Region of Namadgi National Park, and • the first aerial shooting program targeting fallow deer in the ACT took place in the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee river corridors in June 2019. Feral Pigs Feral pigs are widely distributed throughout non-urban parks and reserves in the ACT, and are occasionally found in areas of the Canberra Nature Park. Ground rooting by pigs creates bare ground, contributing to erosion and weed invasion, and impacting on visual amenity for park visitors. Pigs have a varied diet including small mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds’ eggs, soil invertebrates and roots and tubers of native plants. On rural land they dig up pasture, kill lambs, damage fencing and are a potential vector for several serious endemic and exotic livestock diseases such as foot and mouth disease. Annual baiting and trapping programs are conducted in Namadgi National Park and the Murrumbidgee River Corridor. In recent years, cooperative control programs have been conducted with neighbouring landholders. The deleterious impact of feral pigs in Namadgi National Park has been assessed annually since the mid–1980s and the data shows a dramatic decline in damage as a result of sustained control activities. Wild dogs Populations of wild dogs (dingoes and dingo-like dogs which are dingoes with a small proportion of domestic dog genes) are found in Namadgi National Park, areas of the Murrumbidgee River Corridor, Rob Roy Nature Reserve and adjacent areas of timbered land in the ACT. Wild dogs are controlled in these areas to minimise attacks on sheep on neighbouring rural properties. 260 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Management involves a range of methods including 1080 poison baiting, trapping and opportunistic shooting. This integrated approach also achieves effective fox management in dog control areas. In contrast, wild dogs are protected in core reserve areas including the Gudgenby Valley, Cotter Catchment and the Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve where they are the top-order predator in the ecosystem. In addition to controlling wild dogs on ACT rural lands to protect livestock, the ACT Government is also a signatory to three cooperative Wild Dog Management Plans with New South Wales authorities and landholders. These are aimed at protecting livestock from wild dogs originating from Namadgi National Park. Cats Despite the significant impacts on native wildlife, the ACT has no formal programs to manage stray or feral cats. Both domestic and feral cats prey on native animals including birds, reptiles and small mammals. Domestic cats are controlled in many new urban areas through cat containment legislation. Indian Myna Indian Mynas were introduced to the Canberra region in 1968. They have shown a distinct liking for woodland nature reserves and are strong competitors with native wildlife for food and nesting hollows. They are now well established across the ACT. Indian Mynas are very aggressive and intelligent, and are known to evict native birds (including parrots, kookaburras and peewees) from their nests, dumping out their eggs and chasing them from their roosting areas. In 2006, the Canberra Indian Myna Action Group was formed to reduce the impact of this exotic invader on native birds and other animals. The group’s concentrated trapping and removal efforts has been shown to reduce the population of Indian Mynas across Canberra (see Chapter 3 Community leadership in sustainability and science). CASE STUDY: KANGAROOS AND GRASSY ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Overabundant native animals such as kangaroos can have an impact on ecosystem health. Eastern Grey Kangaroos are managed in the urban reserves of Canberra Nature Park to protect conservation values from overgrazing. Conservation culling is undertaken annually, in accordance with the Eastern Grey Kangaroo: Controlled Native Species Management Plan. Kangaroos are managed within a kangaroo management unit (KMU), which are typically comprised of one or more nature reserves and any adjacent habitat available to an isolated kangaroo population. These adjacent land tenures include rural lease, Commonwealth land, parklands, and government horse paddocks. The number of kangaroos to remain in each individual KMU is calculated annually in accordance with the Conservation Culling Calculator Determination (2018). This calculator formulates target densities based on ecological models of how much kangaroos eat coupled with how quickly pasture grows according to historical weather information. In an average grassland, this model indicates that approximately one kangaroo per hectare is consistent with maintaining appropriate grassy layer structure to maintain biodiversity values. In 2018, the ACT Government hosted an expert workshop to review research undertaken since this original model was published in 2010. The workshop included national and international experts in wildlife management, grassy ecosystem dynamics, and kangaroo biology, as well as land management staff. Workshop participants identified that a more specific grassy layer structure target would benefit the evaluation of the kangaroo program effectiveness, and that routine measurements of grassy layer structure could help to inform a more sophisticated approach to establishing kangaroo target densities based on current ground layer vegetation conditions. 261 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report As a result of these recommendations, a working group is developing Herbage Mass Management Guidelines for Lowland Grassy Ecosystems of the ACT. These guidelines identify grassy layer structure targets based on empirical research into the preferred habitat attributes of grassy layer-dependent bird, reptile, invertebrate and plant species. These guidelines also include recommendations around the choice, deployment and integration of different management tools (such as fire, slashing, livestock grazing, macropod management, installation of physical barriers) for use when biannual monitoring identifies areas as being above or below the safe operating environment thresholds. Eastern Grey Kangaroo conservation culling program The annual conservation culling program protects the critically endangered grassy ecosystems of the ACT from the threat of overgrazing by kangaroos. Managing kangaroos at any given site usually involves larger initial reductions in kangaroo population density over 1–3 years, followed by smaller annual maintenance programs to maintain an equilibrium between kangaroo grazing pressure and grassy habitat. The capacity of the program has increased over time, enabling new sites within Canberra Nature Park to be added to the program based on prioritisation of conservation values and consideration of operational constraints. Between 2009 and 2019, over 22,000 kangaroos were culled to protect grassy ecosystems (Figures 33 and 34). The largest annual cull was 4,035 kangaroos conducted in 2019. The annual cull numbers have increased annually since 2013, mainly due to the increased number of management sites. Cull numbers are also dependent on the kangaroo population which varies in response to a range of conditions including food availability. 0 700 1,400 2,100 2,800 3,500 4,200 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Number culled Eastern Grey Kangaroos culled Number of sites in program Number of sites Figure 33: Annual number of Eastern Grey Kangaroos culled and number of program sites, 2009 to 2019. Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 262 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 34: Kangaroo management areas Data sourced from: ACT Parks and Conservation Service 263 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA GAPS Biodiversity • Information on biodiversity is often lacking due to the difficulties and resources required in undertaking comprehensive and extensive monitoring. It is currently not possible to accurately measure the distribution and abundance of all species in the ACT, and not all areas of the ACT can be surveyed and monitored. This means that the knowledge required to answer key biodiversity status and management questions is lacking, such as the ability to track changes in species distribution and abundance. Consequently, data on conservation status is limited and the current number of threatened species likely to be vastly under-reported. • Not all species occurring in the ACT are known, let alone counted. For example, knowledge is poor on the status of invertebrates (including the total number of invertebrate species), mainly due to the lack of dedicated research and monitoring. • Although pressures that have an immediate or visible effect on biodiversity are well recognised – such as invasive weeds and invasive animal species, diseases, climate change and land development – incremental pressures over long periods of time are not as well understood. This means that management can be limited to addressing the known impacts on biodiversity, rather than the prevention of impacts. • The accessibility of available data has been severely reduced by the disparate nature of biodiversity datasets which is collected across a range of government and community groups. However, this is now being addressed and it is expected that data accessibility will be much improved in the future. • It is also difficult to determine biodiversity trends over time because of methodology changes. Whilst this can mean improved data quality, it is often unclear whether biodiversity changes are due to actual changes or increased accuracy. Conservation • At the time of reporting, it was not possible to determine the condition of conservation areas in the ACT. • It is also not currently possible to assess whether offsets have ensured no net loss as a result of land development. However, assessments for offsets will likely take many years, particularly given that management interventions need to be undertaken over long periods of time to achieve the desired ecosystem and biodiversity outcomes. • The ACT Government is implementing a Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program to evaluate the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation outcomes. Native vegetation • It was not possible to determine changes in the extent and condition of native vegetation over the reporting period (2015–16 to 2018–19). Nor was it possible to provide an overall assessment of vegetation condition. Invasive species • It was not possible to comprehensively determine the distribution and abundance of invasive animals in the ACT for this report. • There are few reliable, quantitative measurements for the environmental damage inflicted by invasive species. 264 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Table 1: Species in the ACT listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014, listing history and relevant threatening processes. Information sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Critically Endangered Anthochaera phrygia Regent Honeyeater 2019: Listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • Clearing, fragmentation and degradation of woodland dominated by Box Ironbark • Competition at suitable breeding sites and high rates of nest predation Critically Endangered Lathamus discolor Swift Parrot 2019: Recommended to be listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • Habitat loss and alteration across the mainland and Tasmanian range • Fire • Collision mortality • Competition for resources within altered habitats • Psittacine Beak and Feather Disease • Illegal wildlife capture and trading Critically Endangered Pseudophryne pengilleyi Northern Corroboree Frog 2019: Recommended to be listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • Disease (amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) • Fire • Climate change • Feral animals • Weeds • Habitat disturbance and degradation Critically Endangered (locally extinct) Litoria castanea Yellow- spotted Bell Frog 2019: Recommended to be listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • Amphibian chytrid fungus • Infection from myxosporean parasites • Habitat loss and degradation through clearing, trampling, fragmentation, altered hydrology, salinity • Small population sizes and population fragmentation • Chemicals • Climate change (temperature increase, extreme weather events and droughts) Critically Endangered Caladenia actensis Canberra Spider Orchid 2019: Recommended to be listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • Climate change • Disturbance such as trampling, grazing, development and maintenance of infrastructure, and bushfire • Disease • Low genetic diversity • Life history traits: short flowering period, dependence on a single subfamily of wasps for pollination and an important association with soil fungi Critically Endangered Corunastylis ectopa Brindabella Midge Orchid 2019: Recommended to be listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • Severely restricted distribution (one population) • Life cycle traits (period of dormancy when its presence is not evident, short flowering period, and association with soil fungi) • High sensitivity to disturbance such as erosion, roadworks, shrub growth and weed invasion, herbicides • Illegal collection 265 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Critically Endangered Pterostylis oreophila Kiandra Greenhood 2019: Recommended to be listed as Critically Endangered in line with Commonwealth status National: • Grazing and trampling • Altered hydrology due to the impacts of grazing • Soil disturbance by rooting by feral pigs and trampling • Weed invasion • Inappropriate land management including Inappropriate fire regimes • Plant collection Namadgi: • Invasive animals leading to overgrazing, soil disturbance and erosion • Weeds Endangered Rostratula australis Australian Painted Snipe 2019: Recommended to be listed as Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • The loss and degradation of wetlands, through drainage and the diversion of water for agriculture and reservoirs In NSW, the threats are summarised as: • Drainage of breeding sites in wetlands (particularly in the Murray-Darling Basin) • Reduced water quality from siltation and pollution • Predation by foxes and feral cats • Use of herbicides, insecticides and other chemicals near wetlands • Grazing and associated frequent burning of wetlands • Exotic weeds and invasive native plants degrading wetland habitat • Poor understanding of the species’ breeding ecology Endangered Botaurus poiciloptilus Australasian Bittern 2019: Recommended to be listed as Endangered in line with Commonwealth status • The loss or alteration of wetland habitats due to clearing for urban and agricultural development • Predation by introduced vertebrate pests such as foxes and cats • The primary purpose of urban wetlands (stormwater control) resulting in fluctuating water levels • Reduced water quality as a result of increasing salinity, siltation and pollution Endangered Petrogale penicillata Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby Nil • Historical hunting • Introduced predators (primarily, the red fox) • Introduced herbivores increase competition (primarily, the feral goat) • Bushfire and drought • Uncontrolled human disturbance • Hydatid disease Endangered Dasyurus viverrinus Eastern Quoll 2019: Recommended to be listed as Endangered in line with Commonwealth status National: • Predation by feral cats, red foxes and dogs • Disease • Non-target poisoning associated with 1080 and rodent control programs • Road mortality • Extreme weather events associated with climate change 266 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Endangered Isoodon obesulus obesulus Southern Brown Bandicoot (Eastern) 2019: Recommended to be listed as Endangered in line with Commonwealth status National: • Predation by foxes, feral and domestic cats and to a lesser extent dogs • Habitat loss, fragmentation and degradation • Too frequent and extensive burning • Road mortality • Climate change adversely affecting habitat quality • Displacement by high rabbit densities • Disease, possibly toxoplasmosis • Timber harvesting • Reduced genetic diversity • Poisoning associated with control of non- native predators Endangered Pseudomys fumeus Smoky Mouse Nil • Vegetation clearance (loss and fragmentation of habitat) • Inappropriate fire regimes • Predation (primarily by fox and cat) • Climate change Endangered Tympanocryptis pinguicolla Grassland Earless Dragon Nil • Loss, fragmentation and degradation of grassland habitat (urban development, agriculture) • Bushfire/inappropriate fire regimes • Weed invasion • Climate change • More frequent drought • Loss of genetic diversity • Cultivation and pasture improvement • Overgrazing (kangaroos, rabbits, stock) or short mowing • Development of excessive vegetation biomass • Predation by cats, dogs and foxes • Increased predation by native animals Endangered Maccullochella macquariensis Trout Cod Nil • Habitat modification (sedimentation, cold water pollution, clearing or degradation of riparian vegetation) • River regulation (reduced flows downstream of dams, inappropriate flow timing) • Barriers to fish passage • Overfishing • Sedimentation • Reduction in water quality • Alien species • Climate change • Hybridisation and reduced genetic diversity Endangered Bidyanus bidyanus Silver Perch Nil • River regulation (reduction of water flow downstream of dams) • Barriers to fish passage • Introduced species and disease • Habitat modification • Reduction in water quality • Sedimentation • Historical overfishing • Climate change 267 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Endangered Macquaria australasica Macquarie Perch Nil • Habitat modification • Dams causing alterations to natural flows, movement barriers, and releasing colder hypoxic water (cold water pollution) • Sedimentation of streams and reservoirs resulting in decline of habitat quality and quantity, reducing availability of prey, and smothering eggs and preventing their lodgement • River regulation causing reduced flows and flow at inappropriate time of year • Barriers to fish passage for feeding or breeding habitat due to construction of dams, weirs and road crossings • Overfishing • Reduction in water quality (including pollutant discharges, changes to thermal regimes, and sedimentation) • Alien species (e.g. Brown Trout, Rainbow Trout, Carp, Goldfish, Redfin Perch, Eastern Gambusia, and Oriental Weatherloach) • Climate change • Fire • Low genetic diversity • Reduction in spawning habitat availability • Predation by birds (primarily cormorants) Endangered Synemon plana Golden Sun Moth Nil • Loss, fragmentation and degradation of grassland habitat • Weed invasion (dilution of food plants and altering grassland structure) • Bushfire or inappropriate fire regimes • Herbage mass extremes • Cultivation and pasture improvement • Herbicides and pesticides • Excess nutrients • Shading (by buildings and planted trees) • Altered drainage • Climate change Endangered Gentiana baeuerlenii Baeuerlen’s Gentian Nil • Land clearing and grazing, particularly in times of drought Endangered Prasophyllum petilum Tarengo Leek Orchid Nil • Restricted range and population size (one population) • Vulnerable to environmental change and localised disturbance • Disturbance by Sulphur-Crested Cockatoos • Competition or overcrowding from native and non-native species • Climate change Endangered Rutidosis leptorrynchoides Button Wrinklewort Nil • Habitat loss from agriculture and urban development • Small sites are particularly vulnerable to localised disturbance (human activity, roadside maintenance, waste dumping, inappropriate mowing, parking vehicles) • Weed invasion • Shading and competition with understorey and shrub vegetation • Heavy stock grazing • Erosion of genetic diversity • More frequent drought 268 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Endangered Swainsona recta Small Purple Pea Nil • Loss, degradation and fragmentation of habitat (as a result of urban development and agriculture) • Small, fragmented populations are vulnerable to localised disturbance and stochastic events including climate change, browsing, invasive plants, inappropriate fire regimes, and browsing • Reduced genetic diversity Endangered Muehlenbeckia tuggeranong Tuggeranong Lignum Nil • The species ability to sexually reproduce appears to be very limited – the plants are predominantly dioecious and only one female plant is known to exist • Likely low genetic diversity • Physical disturbance (recreational activity, periodic flooding, bushfire, grazing by macropods) • Weeds Endangered Lepidium ginninderrense Ginninderra Peppercress Nil • Habitat loss from urban development • Habitat degradation associated with land management and / or visitor activities • Disturbance to the existing drainage patterns Endangered Bossiaea grayi Murrumbidgee Bossiaea Nil • Population range reduction and further fragmentation of populations • Dieback (unknown cause) • Weed infestation • Mechanical disturbance associated with forest harvesting Vulnerable Melanodryas cucullata cucullata Hooded Robin Nil • Loss and modification of grassy woodland habitat • Loss of perching sites essential for foraging (removal of timber and litter) • High levels of nest predation • Inappropriate fire regimes • Predation by feral and/or uncontrolled domestic animals (foxes, dogs and cats) • Invasion of key habitats by introduced pasture and weeds • Uncontrolled grazing by livestock • Clearing of both living and dead trees • Rural tree dieback Vulnerable Polytelis swainsonii Superb Parrot Nil • Habitat loss • Climate change • Nest competition • Secondary/potential threats: urbanisation, vehicle strike, predation, poisoning, illegal trade, Psittacine beak and feather disease Vulnerable Climacteris picumnus victoriae Brown Treecreeper Nil • Decline in quality and quantity of woodland habitat • Removal of fallen timber and litter and inappropriate fire regimes • Predation by feral and/or uncontrolled domestic animals (foxes, dogs and cats) • Invasion of key habitats by introduced pasture and weeds • Uncontrolled grazing by livestock • Clearing of both living and dead trees • Rural tree dieback 269 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Vulnerable Grantiella picta Painted Honeyeater Nil • Habitat loss through clearing of breeding and non-breeding habitat • Habitat degradation by grazing of livestock, native macropods and rabbits and lack of recruitment • Removal of mistletoe from trees on rural land and in production forests • Competition with the aggressive Noisy Miner • Nest predation by overabundant Pied Currawongs, Pied and Grey Butcherbirds, and crows and ravens Vulnerable Daphoenositta chrysoptera Varied Sittella Nil • Decline in the quantity and quality of woodland habitat • Tree clearing, small-scale clearing for fence lines and road verges, tidying up on farms, firewood collection • Rural tree decline • Loss of paddock trees • Overgrazing • Fragmentation of habitat • Invasive weeds Vulnerable Lalage tricolor White-winged Triller Nil • Decline in the quality and quantity of woodland habitat • Removal of fallen timber and overgrazing leading to a loss of complexity Vulnerable Hieraaetus morphnoides Little Eagle Nil • Decline in the quality and quantity of woodland habitat • Urbanisation and associated human activity • Increased competition for food and nest sites with Wedge-tailed Eagles • Use of pindone for rabbit control (potential) Vulnerable Calyptorhynchus lathami lathami Glossy Black- cockatoo Nil • Degradation, loss and fragmentation of foraging and breeding habitat • The loss of canopy seed banks of feed trees by clearing or regular burning, as well as poor regeneration of these trees due to grazing, • Predation and competition for nest hollows (potential) • Illegal harvesting (potential) • Climate change Vulnerable Petroica boodang Scarlet Robin Nil • Open forest/woodland habitat loss and degradation • Predation (native and non-native species) • Climate change • Competition (e.g. noisy miners) Vulnerable Dasyurus maculatus maculatus Spotted-tailed Quoll Nil • Habitat loss, fragmentation and degradation • Competition and predation • Poisoning • Killing by humans Vulnerable Mastacomys fuscus mordicus Broad-toothed Rat (mainland) 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Climate change • Too frequent burning • Habitat loss, fragmentation and degradation due to feral herbivores • Weed invasion • Competition with native rodents for food • Predation by foxes and feral cats 270 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Vulnerable Petauroides volans Greater Glider 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Habitat loss, fragmentation through clearing • Inappropriate fire regimes • Climate change reducing habitat suitability Vulnerable Phascolarctos cinereus Koala (Qld/ NSW/ACT population) 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Loss and fragmentation of habitat • Vehicle strike • Disease • Predation by dogs • Drought and incidences of extreme heat are also known to cause significant mortality, and post-drought recovery may be substantially impaired by other threatening factors Vulnerable Pseudomys novaehollandiae New Holland Mouse 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status (presumed extinct in the ACT prior to reintroduction to Mulligans Sanctuary) National: • Inappropriate fire regimes • Predation by feral cat and red foxes • Habitat loss, fragmentation, and degradation • Lower rainfall and more frequent droughts related to climate change Vulnerable Pteropus poliocephalus Grey-headed Flying-fox 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status • Entrapment in fine gauge netting loosely draped over backyard fruit trees • Loss of foraging and roosting habitat through clearance of vegetation for development or agriculture • Climate change Vulnerable (locally extinct) Litoria raniformis Southern Bell Frog 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Habitat loss and degradation • Barriers to movement • Predation • Disease • Exposure to biocides Vulnerable Litoria verreauxii alpina Alpine Tree Frog 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Infection with amphibian chytrid fungus • Trampling by feral horses and cattle • Invasion of alpine bogs and fens by pest species • Weeds • Pollution • Changes to natural water flows • Climate change including increased UV-B radiation • Habitat loss through fire, construction and development 271 5.5 Biodiversity.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Vulnerable (locally extinct) Litoria aurea Green and Golden Bell Frog 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Habitat destruction, degradation and fragmentation • Changes to the structure and diversity of aquatic vegetation • Predation of eggs and tadpoles by plague minnow and, to a lesser extent, European Carp, Goldfish, Brown Trout and Rainbow Trout • Infection with amphibian chytrid fungus • Changes to hydrology, including inappropriate opening of coastal lagoon estuaries and changes to flow/flooding regimes of streams and wetlands • Changes to water quality • Intensification of public access to habitat Vulnerable Aprasia parapulchella Pink-tailed Worm-lizard Nil • Loss and fragmentation of habitat by urban development and associated infrastructure • Incompatible and inadequate land management practices, including fertilizer application, overgrazing and the spread of invasive weeds • Inappropriate fire regimes • Removal of loose surface rock • Predation (by native and exotic species) • Build-up of vegetation biomass and leaf litter altering thermoregulatory opportunities Vulnerable Delma impar Striped Legless Lizard Nil • Loss and fragmentation of habitat through clearing of native grasslands for urban, industrial and infrastructure development and for agricultural purposes • Modification and degradation of native grassland habitat through incompatible and inadequate land management practices, weed invasion • Other potential effects of urbanisation, including increased incidence of predation and frequency of fires • Climate change Vulnerable Gadopsis bispinosus Two-spined Blackfish Nil • Habitat modification • River regulation • Barriers to fish passage • Sedimentation • Reduction in water quality • Introduction of alien species • Climate change • Fire • Reduction in spawning habitat availability Vulnerable Euastacus armatus Murray River Crayfish Nil • Overfishing • Removal of riparian vegetation • Sedimentation • River regulation • Residential development • Reduction in water quality • Fires • Invasive species and disease • Climate change Vulnerable Perunga ochracea Perunga Grasshopper Nil • Loss, fragmentation and degradation of grassland habitat • Climate change 272 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Current listing status Scientific name Common name Listing change 2015–16 to 2018–19 Relevant threatening processes (derived from Action Plans or Conservation Advice documents) Vulnerable Eucalyptus aggregata Black Gum 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status • Mortality as a result of habitat clearance • Suppression of gene flow due to habitat fragmentation • Lack of recruitment and genetic hybridisation Vulnerable Pomaderris pallida Pale Pomaderris 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status National: • Rural residential development, weed competition (particularly blackberry) and browsing by feral goats, inappropriate fire regimes • Increasing fragmentation and loss of remnants NSW: • Browsing by other feral animals including deer, goats and potentially horses and grazing by livestock and kangaroos • Sediment runoff from fire trails • Flood damage in smaller riparian populations where frequent flooding may disrupt the lifecycle to the extent that the soil seedbank may be affected • Low genetic diversity in isolated small populations that are likely to be at higher risk of loss from stochastic events • Lack of knowledge regarding dormancy thresholds, seed vigour and seedling and plant performance for this species Vulnerable Thesium australe Austral Toadflax 2019: Recommended to be listed as Vulnerable in line with Commonwealth status • Small populations and numbers make them susceptible to impacts • Heavy grazing • Development of dense shrub or tree cover • Loss and degradation of habitat and/or populations • Weed invasion Regionally Conservation Dependent Bettongia gaimardi Eastern Bettong Nil National: • Predation by foxes (and feral cats) • Habitat clearing/fragmentation of its dry forest and woodland habitat • Habitat degradation and competition from livestock/introduced herbivores including overgrazing by livestock and rabbits • Inappropriate fire regimes • Viral or other diseases • Climate change 273 5.5 Biodiversity.
5.6 WATER 274 © Ryan Colley 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
Section contents Indicator assessment 277 Key actions 278 Main findings 278 Introduction 281 Aquatic ecosystems in the ACT 281 Data trends 285 Indicator W1: Aquatic ecosystem health 285 Indicator W2: River flows 296 Indicator W3: Water quality 305 Indicator W4: Recreational water quality 311 Data gaps 313 275 5.6 Water.
Water in the ACT reaches assessed across 3 ACT catchments Catchment Health Indicator Program (CHIP) 2015 to 2018 67 in good to excellent overall condition, 57% fair 42% condition is strongly influenced by land use had good to excellent riparian condition, 37% fair, 48% poor to degraded 14% with good to excellent macroinvertebrate condition, 49% fair, 26% poor to degraded 25% native species typically account for less than 30% of fish abundance and 20% of fish biomass in the Murrumbidgee River Native fish 30% population increases for Two Spined Blackfish, Macquarie Perch and Murray Cod native fish stocked to lakes and ponds between 2015 and 2019 270,000 population decline for trout cod annual flows well below the long-term average in 2017 and 2018 River flows environmental flow requirements met downstream of storage reservoirs Murrumbidgee River flows greater downstream of the ACT turbidity guideline exceedances high for the Murrumbidgee River (2015 to 2017) Water quality except for nitrogen, water quality is comparable upstream and downstream of the ACT reaches in excellent condition Water quality CHIP results 35% 62% 3% reaches in good condition reaches in fair condition nearly all lake and river sites experienced closures due to enterococci Recreational water quality enterococci main cause of closures in Lake Ginninderra Lake Tuggeranong closed for most of the 2018–19 recreational swim season blue-green algae main cause of closures for Lake Tuggeranong and Lake Burley Griffin ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 276 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality W1: Aquatic ecosystem health Aquatic ecosystem health is variable across the ACT and strongly influenced by land use. Aquatic health is mostly good in conservation areas, but condition is poorer in urban and rural areas. The impact of land use is particularly evident for assessments of macroinvertebrate and riparian condition. Dry conditions in the region are also having an impact on aquatic health. Alien fish populations are high for the Murrumbidgee River with native fish accounting for less than 30% of fish abundance and 20% of biomass. Fair     High W2: River flows All river flows were well below the long‑term average in 2017 and 2018. A continuation of these conditions will have consequences for the ecosystem health and amenity of rivers in the ACT. All discharges downstream of storage reservoirs met the environmental flow requirement; this took place despite the significantly reduced rainfall and river flows in 2017 and 2018. Fair     High W3: Water quality Water quality was generally good for the reporting period, including for sites in urban and rural areas. Water quality results may reflect the decreased rainfall for most of the reporting period. However, turbidity remains an issue following high rainfall events. Water quality in the Murrumbidgee River is comparable upstream and downstream of the ACT indicating minimal water quality impacts in the region. Good     High W4: Recreational water quality Recreation water quality is poor in the ACT for both lakes and rivers. Nearly every monitored recreation site experienced closures due to the exceedance of enterococci guidelines, and blue-green algae has required extended closures in Canberra’s lakes. Lake Tuggeranong was closed for most of the 2018–19 recreational swim season due to poor recreational water quality. Poor     High Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 277 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: identify opportunities to develop water-sensitive urban design measures to reduce the impact of urban land use on aquatic ecosystems. ACTION 2: re-establish riparian vegetation in both urban and rural areas to improve habitat and protect lakes and waterways from pollutant run-off. ACTION 3: establish a government reporting framework for the assessment of aquatic ecosystem health. This should include the selection of key monitoring sites that provide comprehensive coverage of land use types, sub-catchments and ecosystems across the ACT; incorporate work undertaken for the Catchment Health Indicator Program; incorporate all relevant condition parameters; and produce public reports at appropriate intervals to provide meaningful assessments. ACTION 4: produce an annual recreational water quality report that includes monitoring results, investigations into the main sources of pollutants, recommended actions to improve water quality; and assessments of management effectiveness. ACTION 5: increase fish-stocking programs to maintain fish populations in Canberra’s lakes and ponds. ACTION 6: identify opportunities to collaborate with the NSW Government on management activities to improve aquatic ecosystem health upstream and downstream of the ACT, including the management of native and alien fish, re-establishing riparian zones and reducing catchment erosion. ACTION 7: seek to increase water releases to the upper Murrumbidgee River under the Snowy 2.0 project to improve aquatic ecosystem health in the Murrumbidgee River. Main findings Aquatic ecosystem health 2015 to 2018 The main pressures on aquatic ecosystem condition in the ACT are land use impacts, modified river flows, and climate change. This is the first ACT State of the Environment report to use data from the Catchment Health Indicator Program (CHIP). The program assessed 67 reaches in the Ginninderra, Molonglo and Southern ACT catchments. 38 (57%) reaches were in fair condition across the 3 catchments, 26 (39%) were in good condition. Only 2 reaches were found to be in excellent condition and 1 was assessed as poor. Aquatic condition is strongly influenced by land use with reaches in urban and rural areas in poorer health than those in conservation and protected lands. The Southern ACT catchment had the highest proportion of reaches in good to excellent condition with 15 out of the 26 reaches assessed. The presence of some good condition reaches in urban areas shows that healthy aquatic ecosystems can be supported with effective management and water-sensitive urban design. Macroinvertebrate condition 2015 to 2018 Only 25% of reaches assessed were found to have good to excellent macroinvertebrate condition, 26% were found to be in poor to degraded condition, with 49% classed as fair. The Southern ACT and Molonglo catchments had the most reaches with healthy macroinvertebrate communities. Macroinvertebrate condition was strongly linked to land use but also likely influenced by the mostly dry conditions over the assessment period. Riparian condition Only 14% of reaches were assessed as having good to excellent riparian condition, 37% were found to be in fair condition and 48% were assessed as poor to degraded. Urban and rural areas generally had fair to degraded riparian condition due to vegetation clearing. However, there were also some fair and poor reaches in conservation and protected areas. The replanting of native species in cleared riparian zones and the removal of weed species would greatly improve aquatic health and the amenity of aquatic ecosystems for the ACT community. 278 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Native fish There are positive trends for some populations of native fish including the Two Spined Blackfish and Macquarie Perch in the Cotter River, and Murray Cod in some sections of the Murrumbidgee River. Negative native fish population trends include a decline of Trout Cod following the cessation of conservation stocking by the NSW Government in the Upper Murrumbidgee Catchment, and low populations of Golden Perch in the upper reaches of the Murrumbidgee River. Alien fish species are common in the ACT, with native fish typically accounting for less than 30% of total fish abundance and less than 20% of total fish biomass in the Murrumbidgee River. The dominance of alien species in the Murrumbidgee River is mainly due to high numbers of carp. The proportion of native fish abundance is higher in the Cotter River, accounting for over 70% of the total abundance and between 45% and 70% of the total biomass between 2014 and 2019. Alien fish species are having an impact on native fish in the ACT, competing for food and habitat resources, spreading disease and modifying habitat. Between 2015 and 2019, over 162,000 Golden Perch and 107,000 Murray Cod were stocked in Canberra’s lakes and larger ponds. The presence of Murray Cod and Golden Perch in Canberra’s urban lakes and ponds is dependent on stocking. River flows 2015 to 2018 For the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo rivers, annual discharges were well below the long‑term average in 2017 and 2018. These years followed two consecutive years of annual discharges higher than long-term average flows (2015 and 2016). Discharges for the Cotter River and Paddys River also had annual discharges that were well below the long‑term average in 2017 and 2018 with only 2016 above the long-term average. Annual discharges were lowest in 2018 due to the lack of rainfall: the annual discharge in Paddys River was just 7% of the long‑term average; the Molonglo River 15%; Murrumbidgee at Lobbs Hole 17%; Murrumbidgee at Halls Crossing 19%; and Cotter River 24%. These reduced discharges have consequences for ecosystem health as well as the amenity of the ACT’s waterways. Annual discharges for the Murrumbidgee River leaving the ACT were much higher than those upstream of the region. The ACT’s additions to Murrumbidgee River flows are vital for downstream ecosystem health and water supply, particularly during low flow periods. All discharges downstream of storage reservoirs met the environmental flow requirement; this took place despite the significantly reduced rainfall and river flows in 2017 and 2018. Water Quality 2015 to 2018 Water quality guidelines were met for nearly all monitoring samples taken in the Murrumbidgee River for pH, electrical conductivity and dissolved oxygen. Turbidity guideline exceedances were for high for the Murrumbidgee River for the years 2015 to 2017. Exceedances in 2018 were lower than other years and are likely related to reduced rainfall and catchment run-off. Except for nitrogen, water quality in the Murrumbidgee River is comparable upstream and downstream of the ACT, with turbidity slightly improving as the river moves though the region. For assessments undertaken as part of the CHIP, water quality was found to be excellent for 35% of reaches and good for 62%, with only 2 reaches assessed as fair condition. All catchments had the majority of their reaches in good to excellent condition for water quality. The Southern ACT catchment had 62% of reaches in excellent condition. Although the ACT’s water quality was generally good, nitrogen concentrations are much higher in the Murrumbidgee River downstream of the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre. Water quality condition is linked to land use with the majority of reaches in excellent condition on conservation and protected land. Despite the added pressures imposed by urban and rural land uses, water quality was still good in these areas, with some reaches attaining excellent condition ratings. This assessment demonstrates the effectiveness of water quality management in some urban areas, particularly as a result of constructed wetlands and other water-sensitive design approaches. Water quality results may also reflect the decreased rainfall for most of the reporting period. Dry conditions decreased the amount of pollutants entering waterways from rainfall run-off. 279 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Recreational water quality 2016–17 to 2018–19 Nearly every monitored recreation site experienced closures due to the exceedance of enterococci (faecal coliform bacteria) guidelines. When compared to the other urban lakes, Lake Ginninderra is the only lake where enterococci is the main cause of recreation closures and had the highest number of closures due to enterococci each year. Murrumbidgee River had a high number of site closures for enterococci. Enterococci results for Paddys River are a concern with substantial periods of closure for the single site monitored. Blue-green algae is the main cause of recreation closures for Lake Tuggeranong and Lake Burley Griffin. Lake Tuggeranong had the highest number of blue-green algae closures in 2016–17 and 2018–19 and was closed for most of the 2018–19 recreational swim season. The Molonglo River was the only river to have recreation closures due to blue-green algae. To reduce the number and duration of recreational closures, there needs to be improved management and interception of run-off in urban areas, and the re-establishment of riparian vegetation in both urban and rural areas. Spotted Marsh Frog. Source: Ryan Colley. 280 05 Indicators, condition and trends © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION 1 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2015, ACT State of the Environment Report 2015, ACT Government, Canberra. 2 Environment Australia, 2001, A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia, Third edition, Australian Government, Canberra, found at www.environment.gov.au/resource/directory-important-wetlands-australia, accessed August 2019. Healthy aquatic ecosystems are essential to the ACT’s biodiversity, urban community, and agriculture. Aquatic ecosystems, and their riparian and floodplain lands, provide many environmental benefits and are habitat for both aquatic and terrestrial species. They provide ecosystem services such as the supply of water resources, water purification and nutrient cycling, and are important places for culture, recreation and social interaction. This section provides an assessment of aquatic ecosystems and water quality in the ACT. The following indicators are assessed: • Indicator W1: Aquatic ecosystem health • Indicator W2: River flows • Indicator W3: Water quality • Indicator W4: Recreational water quality Threatened aquatic biodiversity is discussed in section 5.5 Biodiversity. Water resources and consumption are discussed in section 5.2 Human settlements. Assessments of the ACT’s groundwater systems are not included in this report. Groundwater is a minor component of total water use in the ACT, and typically restricted to non-potable supply. There is also a lack of comprehensive data on groundwater resources and quality data in the ACT making difficult to assess their condition. The ACT’s State of the Environment 2015 report concluded that groundwater availability and quality were likely to be good in the ACT.1 It was also concluded that the volume of groundwater extraction was far less than the recharge volume for aquifers. Aquatic ecosystems in the ACT The main rivers in the ACT region are shown in Figure 1, these are: • Murrumbidgee River, which is the largest river flowing through the region and the second longest river in Australia. The river originates in the alpine area to the south of the ACT and is heavily influenced by water diversions from the Snowy Mountains Scheme. All rivers and creeks in the ACT drain into the Murrumbidgee River. • Molonglo and Queanbeyan rivers, which originate to the south-east of the ACT and drain through Lake Burley Griffin before flowing into the Murrumbidgee River. The Queanbeyan River supplies water to the Googong Reservoir. • Cotter River, which has a protected catchment and provides high-quality water to three reservoirs: Corin, Bendora and Cotter. The river originates in the Brindabella Mountains before flowing into the Murrumbidgee River. • Gudgenby, Naas, and Paddys rivers are also significant rivers in the region. Canberra has three constructed lakes – Lake Burley Griffin, Lake Ginninderra and Lake Tuggeranong – and numerous constructed ponds and wetlands. These lakes provide habitat for biodiversity, water pollution control, improve aesthetics and heat mitigation, and are sites for a range of recreational opportunities. The ACT also has the Ramsar-listed Ginini Flats Wetland Complex in the Namadgi National Park, and 12 nationally important wetlands listed in the Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia (Figure 2).2 High Country Bogs and Associated Fens was added to the endangered category of the ACT Threatened Ecological Communities List in February 2019. 281 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 1: Catchments and main rivers in the ACT region Source: Bureau of Meteorology 282 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 2: Significant wetlands in the Canberra region Source: Bureau of Meteorology Pressures on aquatic ecosystems There are many pressures on the ACT’s aquatic ecosystems including changes in land use types, degradation of water quality, loss of riparian and other catchment vegetation, the alteration of natural flow regimes, modified river channels, streamflow diversion, fire, introduced species, and recreational fishing. Many of these pressures are rarely localised, with impacts usually affecting downstream ecosystem health. In the case of significant impacts, river degradation can be extensive. For example, the impacts of storage dams and their associated flow alteration on rivers can occur over extensive distances (see Case study: Impact of the Snowy Mountains Scheme on the Murrumbidgee River). This means that for those river systems that originate in NSW (Murrumbidgee and Molonglo Rivers), their condition within the ACT is highly influenced by upstream catchment conditions and management. The main pressures on aquatic ecosystems are discussed below. Land use and habitat loss The clearance of vegetation and degradation of soils associated with modified landscapes such as urban and agricultural areas can significantly impact aquatic ecosystem health. Modified landscapes 283 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report increase the pollutant and sediment loads entering waterways and alter hydrology through changes to natural drainage and river channels. The construction of large impervious surfaces in urban areas also increases surface run-off which can pollute waterways with fertilisers and other chemicals, organic matter, salts, soil, oil and sewage effluent. The clearance and degradation of riparian zones has resulted in the loss of crucial habitat (including instream woody debris and terrestrial habitat) and functions such as shading, channel protection and food resources. Riparian condition has also been affected by loss of connectivity and the introduction of exotic species such as willow trees (see riparian connectivity in section 5.5 Biodiversity). Agricultural production can also have significant impacts on aquatic ecosystems. For example, native vegetation clearance for cropping and grazing has led to increased soil erosion and the potential for chemicals and animal waste to enter waterways. These compromise water quality through sedimentation, elevated nutrients, and the introduction of potentially toxic chemicals. Forestry activities can also impact on aquatic ecosystems, particularly through erosion and increased run-off following harvesting operations and the introduction of roads. River flows Water reservoirs and weirs cause significant alteration to the timing and volume of natural flow regimes and are barriers to the movement of fish and other species. Changes to natural flows are particularly detrimental for species with life-cycle stages that are intimately linked to seasonal flow changes. In addition to flow alteration, reservoirs can cause thermal pollution through the release of cold water which can impact on biodiversity. Other impacts on river flows include channel modifications to prevent the duration and frequency of flooding. Any alteration to river flows can change the natural morphology of rivers. The impacts of modified flow regimes are compounded by the occurrence of drought. Extended periods of reduced flows can lead to increased water temperatures (especially where riparian vegetation has been cleared), degraded water quality and increased risk of algal blooms. These have negative consequences for biodiversity and agriculture (stock animals). Extended dry conditions can also result in habitat loss and depleted biodiversity on the edges of water systems. Fire Bushfires remove vegetation cover, exposing and altering the structure of soils and increasing the risk of significant erosion. Consequently, rainfall and run-off after bushfires can deposit large volumes of sediment and ash into aquatic ecosystems. These deposits degrade water quality by increasing turbidity and nutrient concentrations, and can reduce dissolved oxygen concentrations causing the loss of fish and macroinvertebrates. Large amounts of sediment and ash can also smother instream habitat. Severe fires can also result in the loss of riparian vegetation and the habitat, shading and food resources that this vegetation provides. In addition to biodiversity impacts, fires that occur in drinking-water catchments can have consequences for domestic water supply. These include increased water treatment costs and reductions in water yields due to increased uptake by regenerating vegetation. Climate change Climate change exacerbates existing pressures on aquatic ecosystems. Reduced rainfall (including snowfall), hotter temperatures and increased evapotranspiration (see section 5.1 Climate change) all have severe consequences, including: • reduced river flows and reduced wetland inundation • reduced deep water habitat refuges • higher water temperatures and lower dissolved oxygen concentrations • extended dry periods punctuated by severe storms which result in large nutrient, sediment and other pollutant pulses • increased algal blooms, and • more frequent and severe bushfires which compromise water quality and riparian vegetation. Although the aquatic species of the ACT are well-adapted to extremes of floods and droughts, these events are projected to intensify under climate change, pushing some species and communities beyond their ability to adapt. In the long term, the pressures of climate change on freshwater ecosystems could lead to significant and long-lasting changes in the species present in rivers, lakes and wetlands in the ACT. 284 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA TRENDS Indicator W1: Aquatic ecosystem health 3 Brawata, R., B. Stevenson and J. Seddon, 2017, Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program: An Overview, Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. 4 Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, 2018, Catchment Health Indicator Program 2018, Waterwatch, Canberra. This indicator focuses on the health of rivers and streams in the ACT. Although some urban wetland and lake sites contribute to the ecosystem health assessments presented, these do not allow comprehensive assessments of Canberra’s urban lakes and wetlands. There are also no available assessments of wetland condition in the ACT. However, upland bogs and fens are included in the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program being undertaken by the ACT Government (see section 5.5 Biodiversity).3 This monitoring program will provide data on the condition of these wetlands in the future. This indicator also includes assessments of native fish and macroinvertebrates. These provide an indication of the health of aquatic ecosystems and demonstrate the biological impacts of degraded habitat, changes to flows and water quality, and the impacts of invasive aquatic species. ASSESSING ACT’S AQUATIC HEALTH – THE CATCHMENT HEALTH INDICATOR PROGRAM (CHIP) This is the first ACT State of the Environment report to use data from CHIP.4 The program provides a score of catchment health in the ACT region using data collected by Waterwatch volunteers and staff. Assessments include monthly water quality data, macroinvertebrate (water bugs) abundance and diversity collected twice a year from key sites, and riparian vegetation assessments conducted every two years. When combined for an individual stretch of waterway (a reach), these data produce a score that indicates the overall health of that reach. A reach only receives a score if the minimum data requirement is met. Assessments are accompanied by a report card supplied by the local Waterwatch coordinator to provide expert knowledge on condition results and possible issues. The report cards ensure that vitally important context is provided by the coordinators who know the underlying geology, hydrology, land use and history of the catchments. These considerations must be considered when using and interpreting the CHIP. In 2018, CHIP produced 96 reach report cards informed by 232 site surveys. These were conducted by over 200 volunteers and included 2,081 water quality surveys, 192 macroinvertebrate surveys and 220 riparian condition surveys. The total area surveyed by CHIP is more than 11,400 square kilometres and includes 5 catchments: Southern ACT catchment (26 reaches); Molonglo catchment (26 reaches); Ginninderra catchment (15 reaches); Cooma region (23 reaches); and the Yass catchment (6 reaches). Information on these catchments are provided in annual CHIP reports. The use of CHIP data in the ACT State of the Environment report Because this is the first inclusion of CHIP data in state of the environment reporting, the results can be seen as baseline data. Future State of the Environment reports will use this baseline data to assess changes in aquatic ecosystem health in response to changing conditions and management activities; they will also present data on the average CHIP score (condition) for reaches over a 4-year period aligned to the State of the Environment reporting periods. This approach is considered to be more accurate than comparisons of annual data which often represent short-term changes rather than actual trends in condition. This 2019 report uses average scores for the 2015 to 2018 period. CHIP results for the Cooma region and Yass catchment are not presented in this report because they are situated almost entirely in NSW. However, for catchments in the ACT that include NSW lands (Molonglo and Ginninderra), all reaches in the catchment are included. It is important to note that the site selection used for CHIP has a significant influence on the overall number of reaches assigned to a particular condition score. For example, having a high proportion of survey 285 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report sites in urban areas will likely mean a higher total of sites in poorer condition categories. Consequently, although figures on the number of reaches in each condition category may be useful for an overview of CHIP results, they should be viewed with caution. It is more appropriate to compare changes in individual reach condition over time, than to make comparisons between different reaches and catchments. Information on reaches used for CHIP assessments, including individual condition scores, characteristics and location, and the main pressures affecting condition, can be found in annual CHIP reports.5 Overall aquatic ecosystem condition – the Catchment Health Indicator Program Overall condition was assessed for 67 reaches in the Ginninderra, Molonglo and Southern ACT catchments, with scores averaged for the 2015 to 2018 period. For the total reaches assessed, 38 (57%) were in fair condition across the 3 catchments and 26 (39%) were in good condition (Figures 3 and 4). Only 2 reaches were found to be in excellent condition and 1 was assessed as poor. Aquatic condition is strongly 5 Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, 2018, Catchment Health Indicator Program 2018, Waterwatch, Canberra. influenced by land use with reaches in fair condition mostly in urban and rural areas, and those in good and excellent condition mostly on conservation and protected lands. Only 2 of the 15 reaches assessed in the Ginninderra catchment were in good condition, the rest were classed as fair. For the 26 Molonglo catchment reaches, 11 were found to be in good condition and 15 were classed as fair. The Southern ACT catchment had the highest proportion of reaches in good to excellent condition with 15 out of the 26 reaches assessed (58%). It was also the only catchment with excellent condition scores, although this was only achieved for 2 reaches. The higher proportion of good and excellent condition reaches is mainly due to the catchment having large areas of conservation and protected lands with unmodified landscapes. For urban and rural areas in the Southern ACT catchment, 10 reaches were classed as fair and 1 as poor. These results show that aquatic ecosystem condition is variable across the ACT. Although results are strongly linked to land use, the presence of some reaches in good condition in urban areas shows that healthy aquatic ecosystems can be supported with effective management and water-sensitive design. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Southern Molonglo Ginninderra Number of reaches Excellent Good Fair Poor Figure 3: Average Catchment Health Indicator Program score for catchment reaches, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. 286 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 4: Average Catchment Health Indicator Program score for catchment reaches, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. Note: Each dot represents the condition of a reach. NSW sites are not shown. 287 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Macroinvertebrate condition – Catchment Health Indicator Program Aquatic macroinvertebrates are a diverse group of insects, crustaceans and molluscs that include dragonflies, stoneflies, snails, yabbies, water boatmen and worms. They are relatively sedentary and spend at least part of their life in aquatic ecosystems. Macroinvertebrates are critical to aquatic ecosystem health because they are an important food source for fish and other species such as platypus, and are critical to ecosystem processes such as nutrient cycling. Because macroinvertebrates are widespread, easy to sample and sensitive to a range of pressures, they are routinely used as indicators of the condition of aquatic systems and their surrounding catchments. Land use change, aquatic and riparian habitat modification, water pollution, and river regulation all affect macroinvertebrate community health. The CHIP assesses macroinvertebrate community health for each reach using the results of 2 annual surveys from key sites. The assessment methodology can be found in the 2018 CHIP report.6 6 Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, 2018, Catchment Health Indicator Program 2018, Waterwatch, Canberra. Macroinvertebrate condition was assessed for 65 reaches in the Ginninderra, Molonglo and Southern ACT catchments, with scores averaged for the 2015 to 2018 period. For the 65 reaches assessed, 26% were found to be in poor to degraded condition, with 49% classed as fair (Figures 5 and 6). Only 25% of reaches assessed were found to have good to excellent macroinvertebrate condition. The Ginninderra catchment had no reaches with good macroinvertebrate condition, the Molonglo catchment had 8 reaches, and the Southern ACT catchment had 5 reaches classed as good and 3 as excellent. The CHIP scores for macroinvertebrate condition are strongly linked to land use, with urban and rural areas generally having fair to poor condition. In such areas, high levels of pollution, alteration to natural flows and loss of riparian vegetation are likely to have had a negative effect on macroinvertebrate communities. Macroinvertebrate results are also likely influenced by the mostly dry conditions over the assessment period, with reduced flows affecting the diversity and abundance of macroinvertebrates (see section 5.1 Climate Change). 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Southern Molonglo Ginninderra Number of reaches Excellent Good Fair Poor Degraded Figure 5: Average Catchment Health Indicator Program macroinvertebrate score for catchment reaches, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. 288 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 6: Average Catchment Health Indicator Program macroinvertebrate score for catchment reaches, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. Note: Each dot represents the condition of a reach. NSW sites are not shown. 289 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Riparian condition – Catchment Health Indicator Program The riparian zone is the land and vegetation that fringe aquatic ecosystems. They are vital for aquatic health as these zones provide habitat, stable banks, shade, buffers and filters for incoming run-off, reducing sediments, nutrients and pollutants, and food for aquatic species. The loss and degradation of riparian zones compromises both aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity. Riparian zones are particularly important during drought periods, providing refuge for terrestrial species and helping to reduce the impacts of low flows on aquatic systems. Riparian vegetation is often the only native vegetation remaining in heavily modified landscapes, making them vital wildlife corridors. The health of riparian zones is often dependent on river flows with many riparian species requiring regular flooding for regeneration. Changes to natural flow regimes and the increased occurrence of drought has significantly reduced the flooding of riparian zones, leading to a decline in riparian vegetation health. Information on riparian connectivity can be found in section 5.5 Biodiversity. The CHIP assesses riparian condition for each reach with surveys conducted every 2 years. The assessment methodology can be found in the 2018 CHIP report.7 It should be noted that the current riparian assessment methodology results in poor scores for sites without extensive tree canopy cover. Consequently, riparian condition assessments for naturally treeless 7 Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, 2018, Catchment Health Indicator Program 2018, Waterwatch, Canberra. ecosystems such as swamps, bogs and fens, are unlikely to reflect their true condition. The riparian condition methodology is being reviewed to improve assessments of naturally treeless ecosystems. Riparian condition was assessed for 67 reaches in the Ginninderra, Molonglo and Southern ACT catchments. Only 14% of reaches were assessed as having good to excellent riparian condition, 37% were found to be in fair condition and 48% were assessed as poor to degraded (Figures 7 and 8). The Ginninderra catchment had no reaches with good riparian condition, the Molonglo catchment had 5 reaches, and the Southern ACT catchment had 4 reaches classed as good and 1 as excellent. As with overall CHIP scores and macroinvertebrates, riparian condition is strongly linked to land use, with urban and rural areas generally having fair to degraded condition due to vegetation clearing. However, there were also fair and poor reaches in conservation and protected areas demonstrating that riparian health can be degraded regardless of land use due to impacts of changed flow regimes and pest plants. However, some of these lower scores also may reflect the methodology used. The restoration of riparian health is perhaps the most easily achievable of actions required to improve aquatic ecosystem condition. The replanting of native species in cleared riparian zones and the removal of weed species would greatly improve aquatic health and the amenity of aquatic ecosystems for the ACT community. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Southern Molonglo Ginninderra Number of reaches Excellent Good Fair Poor Degraded Figure 7: Catchment Health Indicator Program riparian score for catchment reaches, 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. 290 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 8: Catchment Health Indicator Program riparian score for catchment reaches, 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. Note: Each dot represents the condition of a reach. NSW sites are not shown. 291 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Native fish The distribution and abundance of native fish is highly dependent on the condition of aquatic ecosystems. Pressures on native fish include: • alteration and reduction of natural flow regimes • structures such as dams, road crossing and weirs that create barriers to the movement of fish • degraded habitat including loss of riparian vegetation • invasive fish species which place pressure on native fish through predation, competition for habitat and resources, disease and habitat modification • degraded water quality, and • recreational fishing, particularly unregulated (unlicensed) fishing, which impact on species already affected by other pressures. The ACT Government undertakes fish surveys in Cotter River above Cotter Reservoir, the Murrumbidgee River and selected urban lakes. Main findings for the distribution and abundance of fish species include: Cotter River • The data shows a strong population of Two Spined Blackfish in the Namadgi National Park above Cotter Reservoir. • The recovery of Two Spined Blackfish following the 2003 bushfires and Millennium Drought. This recovery has been supported by environmental flows from dams. • Evidence of an expansion of Macquarie Perch upstream of Cotter Reservoir following the construction of a fishway at Vanities Crossing in 2001. • The population of Macquarie Perch has been supported by the translocation of fish from Cataract Reservoir as part of a genetic rescue project. Murrumbidgee River • The decline of Trout Cod following the cessation of conservation stocking by the NSW Government in the Upper Murrumbidgee Catchment. • Murray Cod have shown an increase above Redrocks Gorge. 8 Biomass is influenced by the size of introduced fish such as carp, rainbow trout and brown trout which are often much larger than native species. Abundance and biomass can also be influenced by the numbers of schooling species or juvenile recruitment as compared to larger-bodied species and adults. • Downstream of Redrocks Gorge, the Murray Cod population shows recovery from a decline after the Millennium Drought. • Golden Perch were found to have low population levels in the upper reaches, and populations in the lower reaches were at moderate detection levels showing a small increase after the Millennium Drought. • The Golden Perch population is likely to be dependent on connectivity with populations downstream of the ACT. This is dependent on the occurrence of sufficient flows at the right time of year. Urban lakes • Murray Cod and Golden Perch are stocked to Canberra’s urban lakes and selected ponds. However, they generally do not breed in these environments and so require ongoing stocking to maintain populations. • Successful reproduction of smaller native species, such as Carp Gudgeon, is common in urban lakes and ponds. Native fish abundance and biomass Fish surveys in the Murrumbidgee and Cotter Rivers show that alien species are common in the ACT. For the Murrumbidgee River, native fish typically account for less than 30% of total fish abundance (Figure 9). The biomass (a measurement of the relative size of species) of native fish is even lower in the Murrumbidgee River in comparison to exotic species, typically accounting for less than 20% of total fish biomass (Figure 10). The dominance of alien species in the Murrumbidgee River is mainly due to high numbers of carp. Native abundance and biomass in the Murrumbidgee River have increased in some recent years with the expansion of Murray Cod populations in 2010, and occasional years of high recruitment producing large numbers of juvenile Murray Cod.8 292 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 2019 2017 2015 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2006 2004 Percentage total abundance Native fish abundance Alien fish abundance Figure 9: Abundance of native and alien fish species in the Murrumbidgee River, 2004 to 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Fish surveys are not undertaken for every year. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 2019 2017 2015 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2006 2004 Percentage total biomass Native fish biomass Alien fish biomass Figure 10: Biomass of native and alien fish species in the Murrumbidgee River, 2004 to 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Fish surveys are not undertaken for every year. The proportion of native fish abundance is higher in the Cotter River, accounting for over 70% of the total abundance between 2014 and 2019 (Figure 11). Biomass is more variable with native species accounting for between 45% and 70% of the total biomass over the same period (Figure 12). Native fish abundance in the Cotter River has increased since a low in 2005 during the Millennium Drought. This increase is also generally shown for biomass in the Cotter River, although there was a significant decrease in native fish biomass in 2011 and 2012 due to consecutive large flood events that impacted on breeding seasons. These results show that river flow is a significant driver of changes in native and alien fish abundance and biomass in the Cotter River. In addition to flow, recreational fishing pressure is likely to be reducing the population of 293 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report alien species in the reach between Bendora and Cotter reservoirs. Although native fish abundance and biomass is higher in the Cotter River compared to the Murrumbidgee River, results for both rivers demonstrate that alien species are impacting on native fish in the ACT. River modification has created favourable conditions for alien species to thrive. The greater biomass of alien species has significant implications for native fish communities, particularly in relation to competition for food and habitat resources, as well as the spread of disease and habitat availability. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 2019 2018 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2001 Percentage total abundance Native fish abundance Alien fish abundance Figure 11: Abundance of native and alien fish species in the Cotter River, 2001 to 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Fish surveys are not undertaken for every year. 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 2019 2018 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2001 Percentage total biomass Native fish biomass Alien fish biomass Figure 12: Biomass of native and alien fish species in the Cotter River, 2001 to 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Fish surveys are not undertaken for every year. 294 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Native fish stocking The ACT Government stocks juvenile Murray Cod and Golden Perch into Canberra’s lakes and larger ponds including Lake Burley Griffin (funded by the National Capital Authority), Lake Ginninderra, Lake Tuggeranong, the Yerrabi in Gungahlin, Upper Stranger, Point Hut, West Belconnen and Coombs ponds. Stocking is undertaken to provide recreational fishing and to increase the abundance of native species. The lakes and ponds do not provide the required environmental conditions for the successful breeding of Murray Cod and Golden Perch and so populations must be maintained by regular stocking. Stocking of urban lakes and ponds also aims to reduce the angling pressure on natural riverine populations, such as the Murrumbidgee fish population. Between 2015 and 2019, over 162,000 Golden Perch and 107,000 Murray Cod were stocked to Canberra’s lakes and larger ponds (Figure 13). Canberra’s lakes account for over 80% of the total fish stocked in the ACT with Lake Burley Griffin receiving over half the fish stocked to the lakes. This is because of the size of the lakes which require more fish to meet the target stocking rate of 200 fingerlings per hectare. Upper Stranger Pond was stocked for the first time in 2017 with Golden Perch and Murray Cod stocked at high densities after carp were removed. Four ponds in the new Coombs suburb area were also stocked in 2017 to complement a research project on the effects of lake drawdown. The success of stocking is reliant on fish releases at appropriate intervals with sufficient numbers of fingerlings. Inappropriate stocking levels increases the risk of negative changes to fish population structures. 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000 100,000 2019 2018 2017 2015 Murray Cod Number of fish stocked Golden Perch Figure 13: Number of Murray Cod and Golden Perch stocked to Canberra lakes and ponds, 2015 to 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 295 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report BARRIERS TO FISH PASSAGE IN THE ACT Connected waterways are critical for the survival of native fish. Structures such as dams, weirs and road crossings create barriers that can prevent fish passage. Native fish move within and between waterways to breed and to locate critical resources such as food, shelter, nursery sites and spawning grounds. Native fish species can also utilise different parts of river systems for different life cycle stages. For example, the Murray Cod (Maccullochella peelii) and Golden Perch (Macquaria ambigua) usually travel upstream to find suitable breeding areas. Barriers that prevent fish passage can also cause populations to become isolated, which can lead to inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity.9 An assessment of constructed barriers to fish passage in the ACT conservation estate found: • A total of 234 potential barriers to fish passage. • Seven of these barriers were beneficial barriers that restricted the movement of pest fish species, preventing competition and the spread of disease. • Eighteen sites were assessed as significant barriers to fish movement, 6 sites had a medium level of blockage and 70 sites had a low level of blockage and/or were in low quality aquatic habitat. • Of the total of 234 potential barriers, 133 were assessed as not preventing the movement of native fish.10 These findings show that there are numerous constructed barriers to fish passage in the ACT. The remediation or removal of barriers, particularly those assessed as significantly restricting the movement of native fish, will improve the connectivity of ACT waterways. 9 Pavlova, A. et al., 2017, Severe Consequences of Habitat Fragmentation on Genetic Diversity of an Endangered Australian Freshwater Fish: A Call for Assisted Gene Flow, Evolutionary Applications 10(6): 531–550. 10 Unpublished study conducted by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 11 Kalisch, D. and R. Argent, 2019, Integrated Water Accounts for the Canberra Region 2013–14 to 2016–17, Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Bureau of Meteorology, Canberra. Indicator W2: River flows The ecological condition and functioning of rivers are strongly linked to natural flow regimes. A flow regime is the timing, size and duration of river flow events. It is a key driver of river and floodplain wetland ecosystems, influencing river morphology, biodiversity, and the processes that sustain aquatic ecosystems. Modification of natural flow regimes may affect biodiversity, alter riverine habitat, and facilitate the invasion of exotic species. Aquatic plant and animal species have evolved life histories directly in response to the natural flow regimes. Healthy river flows are also required to support human activities and needs such as domestic water supply, irrigation and recreation opportunities. In the ACT, natural flows have been altered by water resource development such as the presence of dams and other barriers, regulation of flow, diversion or extraction of in-stream flows, and channel modification. Rainfall interception for farm dams can also impact on natural flows but this is minimal in the ACT with farm dams estimated to reduce run-off to surface water by approximately 1%.11 Land use also influences river flows; for example, highly urbanised catchments and cleared agricultural lands can quickly increase river flows due greater rainfall run-off. Other impacts on river flow include fire and plantation forestry. These activities can both increase and decrease flows through the removal of vegetation which increases rainfall run-off, and regeneration which increases the uptake of water. The natural flows in ACT rivers are highly variable, characterised by generally dry conditions punctuated by wet years which replenish water storages and river systems. Flows also vary seasonally with higher flows usually occurring in the winter and spring months. 296 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report River discharge is measured at gauging stations throughout the ACT. Annual data is presented for the 2015 to 2018 period only. For the Murrumbidgee River, annual discharges were well below the long‑term average in 2017 and 2018 for gauging stations located upstream and downstream of the ACT (Figures 14 and 15). This followed two consecutive years of annual discharges higher than long‑term average flows from 2015 to 2016. This trend in annual discharge relative to long-term flows was also evident for the Molonglo River (Figure 16). Discharges for the Cotter River and Paddys River also had annual discharges that were well below the long‑term average in 2017 and 2018 (Figures 17 and 18). But unlike the Murrumbidgee and Molonglo rivers, only annual discharges in 2016 were above the long-term average. Annual discharges were lowest in 2018 due to the lack of rainfall (see section 5.1 Climate Change). This resulted in annual discharges significantly lower than long‑term averages. For example, the annual discharge in Paddys River was just 7% of the long‑term average; Molonglo River 15%; Murrumbidgee at Lobbs Hole 17%; Murrumbidgee at Halls Crossing 19%; and Cotter River 24%. These reduced discharges have consequences for ecosystem health as well as the amenity of the ACT’s waterways. The low rainfall and river flows in the ACT’s drinking-water catchments has also impacted on the ACT’s water resources (see section 5.2 Human settlements – Water resources) 0 50,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 300,000 350,000 400,000 450,000 500,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual discharge Annual discharge (megalitres) Long–term average Figure 14: Annual discharge for the Murrumbidgee River at Lobbs Hole, 2011 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 297 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 500,000 600,000 700,000 800,000 900,000 1,000,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual discharge Annual discharge (megalitres) Long–term average Figure 15: Annual discharge for the Murrumbidgee River at Halls Crossing, 2011 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 0 20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100,000 120,000 140,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual discharge Annual discharge (megalitres) Long–term average Figure 16: Annual discharge for the Molonglo River at Oaks Estate, 2011 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 298 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 45,000 50,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual discharge Annual discharge (megalitres) Long–term average Figure 17: Annual discharge for the Cotter River at Gingera, 2011 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual discharge Annual discharge (megalitres) Long–term average Figure 18: Annual discharge for Paddys River at Riverlea, 2011 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 299 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Water flows entering and leaving the ACT 12 Water Resources Act 2007 (ACT), found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2007-19/, accessed 20 October 2019. To ensure that the ACT is not having a detrimental effect on ecosystem health and water supply downstream of the region, it is important that the volume of water leaving the ACT via the Murrumbidgee River should be comparable to that entering the region. Over the 2015 to 2018 period, annual discharges for the Murrumbidgee River leaving the ACT were much higher than those upstream of the region (Figure 19). This occurred despite the significantly reduced river flows in 2017 and 2018. Reasons for increased discharges include contributions from the Cotter River and Molonglo River, as well as discharges of treated effluent from the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre. These results show that the ACT’s additions to Murrumbidgee River flows are vital for downstream ecosystem health and water supply, particularly during low flow periods. 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 500,000 600,000 700,000 800,000 900,000 1,000,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Lobbs Hole Annual discharge (megalitres) Halls Crossing Figure 19: Comparison of annual discharge for the Murrumbidgee River flowing into the ACT (Lobbs Hole) and leaving the ACT (Halls Crossing), 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Environmental flows Environmental flows describe the quantity and timing of water required to maintain the health of aquatic ecosystems affected by water resource development. In the ACT, environmental flow requirements are specified in the Environmental Flow Guidelines, an instrument under the Water Resources Act 2007.12 In heavily used river systems, such as water supply catchments, environmental flows can be delivered in ways that protect specific components of the flow regime, to help keep stream ecosystems healthy, or to provide conditions required for aquatic fauna life histories (such as fish breeding). Environmental flows can be provided through releases and spills from reservoirs (for example, the Cotter, Murrumbidgee and Queanbeyan rivers) and through restrictions on the amount of water that can be withdrawn. Over the 2015 to 2018 period, all discharges downstream of storage reservoirs met the environmental flow requirement, including discharges below the Cotter Dam (Figure 20), Bendora Dam (Figure 21), Corin Dam (Figure 22) and Googong Dam (Figure 23). Environmental flow requirements were met despite the significantly reduced rainfall and river flows in 2017 and 2018. For the Cotter, Corin and Googong dams, downstream flows greatly exceeded environmental requirements. 300 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000 100,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual flow Annual discharge (megalitres) Environmental flow requirement Figure 20: Annual discharge below Cotter Dam, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual flow Annual discharge (megalitres) Environmental flow requirement Figure 21: Annual discharge below Bendora Dam, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 301 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual flow Annual discharge (megalitres) Environmental flow requirement Figure 22: Annual discharge below Corin Dam, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 0 20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100,000 120,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 Annual flow Annual discharge (megalitres) Environmental flow requirement Figure 23: Annual discharge below Googong Dam, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 302 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY: IMPACT OF THE SNOWY MOUNTAINS SCHEME ON THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER Completed in 1960 as part of the Snowy Mountains Scheme, Tantangara Dam captures flows from the upper Murrumbidgee River and diverts them to Eucumbene Dam for hydroelectricity and irrigation. Since Tantangra Dam came into operation, around 99% of the Murrumbidgee River flows have been diverted to Eucumbene. Revised environmental flow provisions in 2012 increased water releases from Tantangra Dam to the Murrumbidgee River to an average of 26 gigalitres per year. Much of this flow is delivered in spring, but for considerable periods of time there are no water releases from Tantangara Dam. This increased water release only represents 10% of the predicted inflows into Tantangara dam. In contrast, the Snowy River currently receives 21% of its annual discharge as environmental flows. Modelling of potential river flows in the absence of water diversions shows the impact that Tantangara Dam operation (and downstream river abstractions) has on the Murrumbidgee River. The impact of flow diversion is most noticeable upstream of the ACT. A comparison of actual flows and the modelled flows for the Murrumbidgee River at Mittagang crossing (near Cooma), shows that actual monthly mean flows are much lower than would be expected given catchment rainfall and evaporation (Figure 24). The difference is particularly apparent for the winter and early spring months, with modelled mean August flows nearly 5 times higher than actual flows. The difference between actual and modelled flows is reduced further downstream at Lobbs Hole (near ACT’s southern border) and further still at Halls Crossing (near ACT’s northern border) as tributary inflows join the river (Figures 25 and 26). Despite this, differences during peak flow times are significant with a reduction of flows likely to impact on river health and aquatic biodiversity. The upper Murrumbidgee River below Tantangara Dam still retains areas of high ecological significance and is noted for its importance to threatened native fish and other aquatic communities. All of these values are dependent on flows. The upper Murrumbidgee populations of Murray Cod and Macquarie Perch are listed in their respective species recovery plans as nationally significant. Silver Perch are now extinct in the Murrumbidgee River between Tantangara Dam and the ACT – a lack of connectivity resulting from river regulation is a likely contributor to their demise. Nine other aquatic dependent species are also present, some of which are listed as threatened in State and/or Territory legislation. In addition to a range of iconic and threatened species, important hydrological processes are threatened by excessive abstraction, such as sediment flushing. The capacity for riverine flows to naturally push these sediments downstream is greatly impaired by reductions in annual discharge. As such, significant sand slugs have been created in the Murrumbidgee River, creating barriers to connectivity and reducing habitat for a range of species, including fish and platypus. With the Snowy 2.0 project underway, an opportunity exists to improve the environmental outcomes for the upper Murrumbidgee River. Improved environmental flows from Tantangara Dam would greatly enhance the ecological and cultural values for this iconic stretch of river. 303 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 Dec Nov Oct Sep Aug Jul Jun May Apr Mar Feb Jan Actual mean flow Daily discharge (megalitres per day) Modelled mean flow Figure 24: Modelled and actual flows in the Murrumbidgee River downstream of Tantangara Dam at Mittagang crossing near Cooma. Date sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Modelled flows are those predicted in the absence of any river regulation or abstraction. The graph shows mean monthly discharge only, upper and lower ranges may vary considerably. 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 Dec Nov Oct Sep Aug Jul Jun May Apr Mar Feb Jan Actual mean flow Daily discharge (megalitres per day) Modelled mean flow Figure 25: Modelled and actual flows in the Murrumbidgee River downstream of Tantangara Dam below Lobbs Hole. Date sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Modelled flows are those predicted in the absence of any river regulation or abstraction. The graph shows mean monthly discharge only, upper and lower ranges may vary considerably. 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 Dec Nov Oct Sep Aug Jul Jun May Apr Mar Feb Jan Actual mean flow Daily discharge (megalitres per day) Modelled mean flow Figure 26: Modelled and actual flows in the Murrumbidgee River downstream of Tantangara Dam at Halls Crossing. Date sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Modelled flows are those predicted in the absence of any river regulation or abstraction. The graph shows mean monthly discharge only, upper and lower ranges may vary considerably. 304 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator W3: Water quality Water quality is critical to the ecosystem services that rivers provide for a range of social, economic and environmental needs. Good water quality is required for drinking water, aquatic ecosystem health and the biodiversity it supports, as well as for recreational and cultural opportunities. Poor water quality can lead to the loss of aquatic species, human illnesses, and the loss amenity from the closure of recreational water bodies and odour. Degraded water quality can also increase the cost of water treatment and prevent agricultural activity. Water quality is highly sensitive to a range of factors including land use, flow regimes, and the loss of riparian vegetation. Land clearing for agriculture and urbanisation has increased erosion, sedimentation, turbidity and salinity, as well as the increased run-off of a range of pollutants. Agricultural use of chemicals and fertilisers has increased concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus in waterways, as well as concentrations of herbicides and pesticides. Other pressures on water quality include fire and the impact of invasive species such as carp and willow. Water pollutants Sources of water quality pollutants can be broadly classified as point (directly from industry and treatment plants) or diffuse (run-off from catchments). Following significant improvements in the regulation of point source pollution, diffuse sources are the major cause of water pollution. For example, the Canberra urban environment discharges treated sewage effluent from the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre; however, the high level of wastewater treatment means that pollution from unregulated diffuse sources remains the major cause of poor water quality in the ACT. The main water quality issues in the ACT are: • Turbidity and sedimentation: erosion is the main cause of turbidity and sediment problems, with significant occurrences following storms and bushfires. Turbidity reduces light penetration affecting the ability of aquatic plants to photosynthesise and impairing animal activities such as predation. At very high levels, suspended sediment can clog and damage fish gills and the filter-feeding apparatus of animals such as mussels. Large-scale sediment deposition can smother river habitats creating shallow flow areas that are subject to greater temperature extremes and the risk of invasion by aquatic weeds. • Nutrients: although nitrogen and phosphorus are essential plant nutrients, elevated concentrations can cause excessive plant growth (eutrophication), including toxic algal blooms. Nutrient enrichment affects aquatic communities by changing species composition and reducing dissolved oxygen concentrations as a result of algal blooms. The major cause of increased nutrient levels is run-off from urban and agricultural catchments, particularly in areas with high fertiliser usage. Point sources of pollution, such as discharges from agriculture, industry and wastewater treatment plants, have also elevated concentrations of phosphorus and nitrogen. • Salinity: the salt concentration of water presents a direct threat to aquatic ecosystems. While some aquatic species tolerate a range of salt concentrations, changes in salinity can kill a wide range of plants and animals. Human settlements are also affected by salinity because it accelerates corrosion and can damage infrastructure, such as roads and bridges. It also affects soil, plant and livestock health and can therefore reduce agricultural productivity. In the ACT, increased electrical conductivity in some areas may be caused by the underlying natural geology of the catchments. • Dissolved oxygen: the concentration of oxygen in the water is important for the maintenance of aquatic organisms. Low oxygen levels can stress fish, which can lead to fungal infections and disease, or result directly in the death of fish and other aquatic species. Dissolved oxygen concentrations are particularly affected by temperature (colder water can hold more dissolved oxygen), and severe declines occur following algal blooms. 305 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report EXPERT COMMENTARY: WATER QUALITY IN THE ACT Dr Fiona Dyer, Associate Professor in Water Science at the Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra. Water played an integral role in the selection of the site for the city of Canberra. The chosen location provided the water security thought necessary for the nation’s capital. It was not just the quantity of water that was important for early Canberrans, it was the quality – the supply of fresh, clean water – that provided a foundation for the growing population. These days, the quality of water in the ACT’s rivers, lakes and wetlands varies through time and depends on the waterway in question. Some of the ACT’s waterways have pristine water quality, yet others are highly degraded; sometimes our waterways are ideal to swim in, yet at other times they are pose significant health risks. Around 60% of the ACT is either national park or reserve. This provides waterways in these areas with protection from the effects of human activities and changes in land use. Consequently, the quality of water in these areas is the best possible. Canberrans benefit from this because a significant amount of drinking water is sourced from the Cotter River catchment, which is predominantly within the Namadgi National Park. This water requires minimal treatment which not only keeps the costs to consumer low but has broader benefits through smaller amounts of energy and chemicals used to treat the water. The greatest risks to water quality in our parks and reserve systems are posed by large bushfires, and bacteria that are introduced through the waste (faeces and urine) of recreational users. These risks increase with the number of people using the parks and poor practices by park visitors. Limiting access to the Cotter catchment is a key strategy for protecting the quality of our drinking water, but similar strategies do not exist for other parts of the natural estate. As Canberra’s population increases and there are more people using our parks, the risk to water quality will need to be actively managed. While the parks and reserves of the ACT generally have excellent water quality, the same cannot be said of streams in urban areas. A concentration of construction and industrial activities, vehicle emissions, bird and animal droppings, leaves and grass clippings, rubbish, fertilizers and areas of degraded land result in pollutants and sediment entering urban waterways. This situation is exacerbated by the piped stormwater drains and hard land surfaces which mean that when it rains, urban streams carry more faster-flowing water compared to corresponding natural streams. Because of this many urban streams have been lined with concrete to ensure that water is moved efficiently away from homes and other infrastructure. The downside of concrete is that the urban streams lack the biological processes that would naturally reduce the concentrations of sediment and other pollutants. These pollutants are passed through our urban stormwater network and end up trapped in ponds and lakes. Canberra’s ponds and lakes play an important role in the treatment of urban stormwater. They were designed to receive stormwater from the surrounding suburbs, and trap nutrients and other pollutants to prevent them from being passed downstream into the Murrumbidgee River. The smaller urban ponds that are spread throughout Canberra’s suburbs are very effective at trapping nutrients and other pollutants when the flow in the stormwater network is low. At high flows, we rely on the larger lakes to trap the much greater volumes of water and pollutants which then leads to a range of problems within the lakes. Canberrans have a strong affinity for our urban lakes and the recreational opportunities they provide. As such, the water quality of these lakes is of particular importance to the community. The water quality in our lakes varies: sometimes, the water quality is good enough for swimming and the lakes provide a great space for Canberrans to cool off and enjoy water-based activities; at other times, the lakes are plagued by water quality problems that include major toxic cyanobacterial (blue-green algae) blooms or high bacteria levels. While the ability of our lakes to trap nutrients and other pollutants is an important function, the downside is that over time, the pollutants accumulate in the lake and the quality of water declines. Nutrients pose particular problems because high concentrations support the growth of cyanobacteria. In recent years, Lake Burley Griffin, Lake Tuggeranong and Lake Ginninderra have been closed to recreation because of cyanobacterial blooms. Lake Tuggeranong was closed for most of the summer of 2018–2019 because of a particularly severe outbreak of cyanobacteria. The extended closure of Lake Tuggeranong caused a significant loss of amenity to the community. Studies show that high loads of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, delivered to the lake during rainfall events are a major factor contributing to the algal blooms. The most effective way to prevent cyanobacterial blooms is to reduce the amount of nutrients getting into waterbodies. Prevention will require long-term management of catchments to stop nutrients 306 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report entering the stormwater drains. This is not just the responsibility of government agencies through the implementation of water-sensitive urban design principles; all Canberrans have an important role in helping to keep our stormwater clean. We can do this by managing our suburban blocks to reduce run-off and prevent leaves, grass clippings and fertilizers from getting into the stormwater network; making sure that we don’t wash dirt and other pollutants into the drains; being mindful of where our animal waste is being dropped; and getting involved in community groups who help to look after our small urban parks and reserves to ensure that they function more effectively. It will take tens of years of best-practice water-sensitive urban design and catchment management for the water quality in the lakes to improve. This is because there is a legacy of trapped nutrients in the bottom of the lake that can support algal blooms into the future. Without improved catchment management, the problems we experience with cyanobacterial blooms will not change. The water quality challenges faced by our water managers are only going to intensify as Canberra’s climate changes. Longer dry spells will leave areas of bare ground susceptible to erosion. Increases in rainfall intensity will result in more sediments, nutrients and pollutants being washed into streams. Longer periods of hot weather combined with higher nutrient concentrations will result in warmer surface water in our lakes leading to extended periods when cyanobacterial blooms can occur. This will be exacerbated by increases in population and urban densification which leads to increases in run-off and the potential for more sediment, nutrients and pollutants to be washed into the stormwater network. These challenges will require strategic investment, careful management and the engagement of the community to ensure the quality of water in our nation’s capital is the best it can be. Blue-green algae on Lake Tuggeranong in 2019. Photo: Alica Tschierchke, University of Canberra. 307 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Water quality – Catchment Health Indicator Program 13 Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, 2018, Catchment Health Indicator Program 2018, Waterwatch, Canberra. 14 pH is a measure of acidity or alkalinity of water. 15 Murrumbidgee River downstream of the LMWQCC refers to those reaches downstream of the Molonglo River confluence. The Molonglo River receives discharges from the LMWQCC immediately upstream of the confluence with the Murrumbidgee River. The CHIP assesses water quality for each reach using the results of monthly surveys from all sites (where possible). The assessment methodology can be found in the 2018 CHIP report.13 Water quality parameters monitored are pH,14 electrical conductivity, turbidity, dissolved oxygen, phosphorus and nitrate. These parameters have been widely established as the best indicators of water quality while being relatively easy to measure. Water quality was assessed for 66 reaches in the Ginninderra, Molonglo and Southern ACT catchments. Water quality was found to be excellent for 35% of reaches and good for 62%, with only 2 reaches assessed as fair condition (Figures 27 and 28). All catchments had the majority of their reaches in good to excellent condition. The Southern ACT catchment had 62% of reaches in excellent condition. As with all other CHIP parameters, condition is linked to land use with the majority of excellent condition reaches on conservation and protected land. However, despite the added pressures imposed by urban and rural land uses, water quality was still good in these areas, with some reaches attaining excellent condition ratings. These assessments demonstrate the effectiveness of water quality management in some urban areas, particularly as a result of constructed wetlands and other water-sensitive design approaches. Water quality results may also reflect the drier conditions for most of the reporting period. Decreased rainfall reduces the occurrence of urban and rural run-off which are main contributors to water quality decline in the ACT. Although the ACT’s water quality was generally good, nitrogen concentrations are much higher in the Murrumbidgee River downstream of the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre (LMWQCC), with concentrations second only to the Molonglo River immediately downstream of the LMWQCC.15 Nitrogen concentrations (measured as nitrate) for the Murrumbidgee River downstream of the LMWQCC ranged from 4–30 mg/l in 2018, compared to around 1 mg/l upstream of the ACT, and an excellent nitrate score for the Murrumbidgee River reach upstream of the LMWQCC discharge. A nitrate concentration of greater than 2.6mg/l is considered to be degraded under Waterwatch condition thresholds. The high nitrate concentration in the Murrumbidgee River continues downstream of the ACT, particularly during dry periods when the LMWQCC discharge contributes a higher proportion of the total river flows. More information is required on the impacts of the LMWQCC on aquatic ecosystems in the Murrumbidgee River. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Southern Molonglo Ginninderra Number of reaches Excellent Good Fair Poor Figure 27: Average Catchment Health Indicator Program water quality score for catchment reaches, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. 308 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 28: Average Catchment Health Indicator Program water quality score for catchment reaches, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch. Note: Each dot represents the condition of a reach. NSW sites are not shown. 309 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Water quality entering and leaving the ACT 16 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, 2015, ACT State of the Environment Report 2015, ACT Government, Canberra. It is important that the quality of water leaving the ACT via the Murrumbidgee River should be comparable to that entering the region. However, a range of pressures, especially those related to land use, can degrade water quality within the ACT. The impact of the ACT on water quality is determined by comparing ACT Government monitoring results for the Murrumbidgee River at sites upstream and downstream of the ACT. In situ water quality probes measure pH, electrical conductivity, dissolved oxygen (as a percentage of saturation) and turbidity. Phosphorus and nitrogen are not assessed by these probes. Except for turbidity, monitoring results show that all, or nearly all of water quality samples taken in the Murrumbidgee River met guideline levels over the 2015 to 2018 period. This was for sites upstream and downstream of the ACT. Turbidity guideline exceedances were high for both upstream and downstream sites in the years 2015 to 2017 (Figure 29). Exceedances in 2018 were lower than other years and are likely related to reduced rainfall and catchment run-off. The number of turbidity samples exceeding guideline levels was higher upstream of the ACT for all years except 2016. Water quality results for the period 2015 to 2018 show that pH, electrical conductivity, dissolved oxygen and turbidity in the Murrumbidgee River is comparable upstream and downstream of the ACT, with turbidity slightly improving as the river moves though the region. This change suggests that sediment and other particles that cause turbidity are being deposited in the ACT, with a likely impact on ecosystem health and biodiversity. Results also show that turbidity is the main water quality issue for the Murrumbidgee River for the variables assessed. Turbidity was also reported as one of the most serious water quality issues in the ACT’s State of the Environment 2015 report.16 However, results for water quality monitoring undertaken for CHIP show that the ACT is increasing nitrogen levels downstream of the LMWQCC (see the Water quality – Catchment Health Indicator Program section). 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 2018 2017 2016 2015 Murrrumbidgee River at Lobbs Hole % of days exceeding guideline Murrumbidgee River at Halls Crossing Figure 29: Percentage of days exceeding the turbidity guideline level for the Murrumbidgee River upstream (Lobbs Hole) and downstream (Halls Crossing) of the ACT, 2015 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 310 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator W4: Recreational water quality 17 ACT Health, 2014, ACT Guidelines for Recreational Water Quality, found at https://health.act.gov.au/about-our-health-system/ population-health/environmental-monitoring/water-quality 18 National Capital Authority, 2019, Lake Burley Griffin 2018–2019 Recreational Season: Summary of Alerts and Closures, found at https://www.nca.gov.au/national-land/lake-burley-griffin-management/lake-water-quality 19 Total closures are based on results for all monitored sites for each location. Closures for each site occur concurrently and so the data presented does not represent the actual period each location was closed to recreation over the swimming season. Recreational water quality refers to the suitability of water for swimming and other activities that involve direct contact with the water. Canberra’s lakes and rivers are important for providing amenity and opportunities for recreation. However, the use of lakes and rivers depends on having good recreational water quality. Assessments of recreational water quality are based on the potentially harmful bacteria known as enterococci and blue-green algae (cyanobacteria). Enterococci, also known as faecal coliform bacteria, are not necessarily a problem for aquatic ecosystems, as they generally serve as food for aquatic organisms without causing them harm. However, the presence of high numbers of faecal coliforms can affect human health when recreational activities involve direct contact with the water. Ingestion of these bacterial pathogens can lead to gastrointestinal illnesses such as diarrhoea. Stormwater run-off is the main source of enterococci, with sewage overflows and releases from damaged pipes also potential sources. Blue-green algae are naturally present in aquatic ecosystems, but under certain conditions their populations can increase causing a potentially toxic bloom. Low river flows, high temperatures and high levels of nutrients are the primary cause of blue-green algal blooms. Blue-green algae can produce toxins that are harmful to humans and animals when they are swallowed, inhaled, or come into direct contact with the skin. Reactions are variable, depending on the length and type of contact. Common symptoms include irritated skin, flu-like symptoms and gastrointestinal illness resulting in vomiting, diarrhoea, fever and headache. Recreational water quality monitoring Recreation water quality monitoring is undertaken in accordance with the ACT Guidelines for Recreational Water Quality across a total of 17 sites in Lake Ginninderra, Lake Tuggeranong and the Murrumbidgee, Paddys and Molonglo rivers. 17 Recreational water quality is also assessed at 10 sites in Lake Burley Griffin by the National Capital Authority. 18 Although the ACT Government is not responsible for the management of Lake Burley Griffin, this data is included because of the important amenity and recreational value of the lake to Canberrans. Water samples are taken weekly during the recreational swimming season (between approximately October to April) for enterococci and throughout the year for blue-green algae. If samples for enterococci and blue-green algae exceed guideline levels, then a resample is obtained and tested. If two consecutive samples exceed guideline levels, then the site is closed for primary contact. Reopening a recreational site after a closure requires two samples within guideline levels. The ACT Recreational Water Guidelines were updated in October 2014 and the new exceedance levels were incorporated into monitoring from 2016–17. Due to this change, this report only includes data from 2016–17 onwards. Results for enterococci monitoring over the 2016–17 to 2018–19 period for are shown in Figure 30. The main trends are: • nearly every monitored recreation site experienced closures due to the exceedance of enterococci guidelines. • for lake recreation areas, Lake Ginninderra had the highest number of site closures for each year, although there were slight declines in enterococci closures over the reported period.19 • Lake Ginninderra is the only lake where enterococci is the main cause of recreation closures. • Lake Burley Griffin had the lowest total enterococci closures for Canberra’s lakes. • the Murrumbidgee River had a high number of site closures for enterococci, but this is likely a reflection of the greater number of sites monitored in comparison to other recreation areas. • enterococci results for Paddys River are a concern with substantial periods of closures for the single site monitored, including for 20 weeks in 2017–18 (the recreational swimming season is typically around 27 weeks), and • all recreational closures for the Murrumbidgee River and Paddys River were due to enterococci. 311 5.6 Water.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10 20 30 40 50 Molonglo River (1 site) Paddys River (1 site) Murrumbidgee River (8 sites) Lake Burley Griffin (10 sites) Lake Tuggeranong (3 sites) Lake Ginninderra (4 sites) 2016–17 Number of weeks closed 2017–18 2018–19 Figure 30: Total weeks of site closures due to exceedance of enterococci guidelines over the recreational season (October to April), 2016–17 to 2018–19. The number of sites monitored is shown for each recreation area. Data sourced from: ACT Health and the National Capital Authority. Notes: Total closures are based on results for all monitored sites for each location. Closures for each site occur concurrently and so the data presented does not represent the actual period each location was closed to recreation over the swimming season. Results for blue-green algae monitoring over the 2016–17 to 2018–19 period for are shown in Figure 31. The main trends are: • the principal reason for recreation closures for Lake Tuggeranong and Lake Burley Griffin is blue-green algae. • Lake Tuggeranong had the highest number of blue-green algae closures in 2016–17 and 2018–19, and Lake Burley Griffin for 2017–18. • Lake Tuggeranong was closed for most of the 2018–19 recreational swim season due to severe blue-green algal blooms. • There were no closures due to blue-green algae for Lake Burley Griffin in 2016–17, and • the Molonglo River was the only river to have recreation closures due to blue-green algae. 312 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Molonglo River (2 sites) Lake Burley Griffin (10 sites) Lake Tuggeranong (3 sites) Lake Ginninderra (4 sites) 2016–17 Number of weeks closed 2017–18 2018–19 Figure 31: Total weeks of site closures for exceedance of cyanobacteria guidelines, 2016–17 to 2018–19. The number of sites monitored is shown for each recreation area. Data sourced from: Transport Canberra and City Services and the National Capital Authority. Notes: Total closures are based on results for all monitored sites for each location. Closures for each site occur concurrently and so the data presented does not represent the actual period each location was closed to recreation over the swimming season. The high number of recreational site closures due to enterococci shows that urban and rural run-off is depositing high levels of this bacteria into the ACT’s lakes and waterways. To reduce the number and duration of closures, there needs to be improved run-off management and interception in urban areas, and the re-establishment of riparian vegetation in both urban and rural areas (see Expert commentary: Water quality in the ACT). Urban and rural run-off is also the main driver of recreation closures due to blue-green algae. Rainfall run-off transports high amounts of nutrients into lakes and other waterways enabling algal blooms to occur. Consequently, improved run-off management and interception is key to reducing algal blooms in Canberra’s lakes. However, the occurrence of algal blooms is also driven by climate factors such as extended dry periods and hotter temperatures. With these conditions set to increase as a result of climate change (see section 5.1: Climate change), reducing the amount of nutrients in waterways will be required to prevent longer and more frequent recreation closures in the future. The prevention of blue-green algae blooms will not only increase the amenity of the ACT’s lakes and waterways, but will also prevent potential impacts on aquatic ecosystems such as fish kills. DATA GAPS • Information is poor for groundwater resources and condition, including contamination. • Little information exists on wetland health. • Although current monitoring sites provide good coverage of the ACT’s urban areas, there needs to be more comprehensive monitoring for aquatic ecosystems in conservation and rural areas to provide a broader picture aquatic health across the region. • More information is required on the impacts of the LMWQCC on aquatic ecosystems in the Murrumbidgee River, particularly with regard to nitrogen concentrations. 313 5.6 Water.
5.7 FIRE 314 © Ryan Colley 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
Section contents Indicator assessment 317 Key actions 318 Main findings 318 Introduction 319 Increasing bushfire risk in the ACT 320 Prescribed burning 320 Data trends 321 Indicator F1: Area burnt in prescribed burns and bushfires 321 Indicator F2: Fire risk 325 315 5.7 Fire.
ACT’s average and maximum Fire Danger Index have increased 4x increase in Very High Fire Danger days from 11 in 2014–15 to 44 in 2018–19 11 Severe Fire Danger rating days Climate change expected to increase fire danger Fire danger Fire in the ACT 2015–2019 NO large bushfires since 2003 13,000 hectares burnt with prescribed burns responsible for 96% 16% were caused by lightning 10% were caused by accidents Fire occurrence 45% of all non-prescribed burn ignitions are deliberatly litA Over 12,200 hectares of fuel reduction burns Fuel reduction burns accounted for 98% of all prescribed burns 270 hectares burnt for ecological purposes 11 hectares of burning with cultural outcomes Prescribed burns A - Over the period 2004 to April 2019 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 316 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Indicator assessment Indicator Status Condition Trend Data quality F1: Area burnt in prescribed burns and bushfires Since 2003, there have been no large bushfires in the ACT. The area of prescribed burns far exceeds that of bushfires, accounting for 94% of the total hectares burnt between 2004 to April 2019, and 96% between 2015 to 2019. Prescribed burns are dominated by fuel reduction activities, with ecological and cultural burns responsible for only 2% of all burning activity between 2015 and April 2019. However, there is a growing recognition of the importance of fire for vegetation, biodiversity and cultural management in the ACT. Arson remains an issue for fire occurrence in the ACT, responsible for 45% of ignitions between 2004 and April 2019, compared to 16% for lightning and 10% for accidents. Good     High F2: Fire risk Between 2014–15 and 2018–19, climate conditions led to an increase in the average and maximum Fire Danger Index (FDI). There was also an increase in the number of days with a very high Fire Danger Rating (FDR) from 11 days in 2014– 15 to 44 in 2018–2019. The 2018–19 fire season had the highest fire danger, with the greatest number of very high and high FDR days, and the highest maximum FDI. Climate change is expected to increase both average and severe FDI in the future. Fair     High Indicator assessment legend Condition Good = Environmental condition is healthy across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have negligible impact on environmental condition/human health. Fair = Environmental condition is neither positive or negative and may be variable across the ACT, OR pressure likely to have limited impact on environmental condition/human health. Poor = Environmental condition is under significant stress, OR pressure likely to have significant impact on environmental condition/ human health. Unknown = Data is insufficient to make an assessment of status and trends. NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Trend   Improving   Deteriorating  Stable  Unclear NA =  Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. Data quality    High = Adequate high-quality evidence and high level of consensus    Moderate = Limited evidence or limited consensus    Low = Evidence and consensus too low to make an assessment    NA = Assessments of status, trends and data quality are not appropriate for the indicator. 317 5.7 Fire.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Key actions That the ACT Government: ACTION 1: increase ecological burning to improve the health and biodiversity of native vegetation communities, particularly for grasslands which require more frequent fire. ACTION 2: increase cultural burning opportunities in partnership with Traditional Custodians and Murumbung Rangers. ACTION 3: ensure ecosystem and biodiversity outcomes are considered before conducting fuel reduction burns so that ecologically appropriate burning is undertaken. ACTION 4: in response to increasing fire danger in the ACT, ensure adequate resources are available to reduce the risk of fire impacting on bushfire-prone areas, environmental assets and sensitive ecosystems, and to improve suppression opportunities and effectiveness should a fire occur. Main findings Area burnt long-term findings Since the 2003 bushfires, which burnt an area of 164,000 hectares, there have been no large bushfires in the ACT. The annual area of vegetation burnt in bushfires since 2003 has mostly been under 100 hectares except for 591 hectares in 2004, 1,474 hectares in 2006, and 443 hectares in 2018. The area subject to prescribed burning in the ACT has far exceeded that of bushfires accounting for 94% of the 45,000 hectares burnt between 2004 and April 2019. Area burnt over the reporting period (2015 to 2019) Over 13,000 hectares were burnt with prescribed burns responsible for 96% (12,540 hectares) of the total area burnt. There were only two notable bushfires – the 204-hectare Pierces Creek fire in November 2018 caused by an abandoned vehicle being set alight in an act of arson; and the 200-hectare Potters Hill fire in Namadgi National Park in March 2018 caused by a prescribed burn re-ignition. Fire ignition causes Most fires in the ACT are deliberately lit. Between 2004 and April 2019, arson accounted for 45% of all non-prescribed burn ignitions in the ACT, compared to 16% for lightning and 10% associated with accidents. Prescribed burns Since 2009, fuel reduction burns accounted for 99% (around 31,500 hectares) of all prescribed burns in the ACT. There is a growing recognition of the importance of fire for vegetation, biodiversity and cultural management in the ACT. The period 2015 to April 2019 saw a large increase in ecological burning with 270 hectares treated. In addition, 10 hectares were burnt for both cultural and ecological reasons (multiple purpose) and one hectare for cultural purposes only. However, ecological and cultural burns only accounted for 2% of all prescribed burns over the period. Decisions on fuel reduction burns need to consider ecosystem and biodiversity requirements to ensure ecologically appropriate burning is undertaken. It is important to develop and maintain a mosaic of burnt and unburnt fuels in strategic locations across the landscape to address both fuel management and biodiversity requirements. Fire risk 2014–15 to 2018–19 The reporting period saw an increase in the average and maximum Fire Danger Index (FDI), showing a growing trend in potentially more severe fires if they were to occur. Increased FDI also indicates an increasing potential difficulty in fire suppression in the ACT. The 2018–19 fire season produced the greatest number of very high and high Fire Danger Ratings (FDR) days, and the highest maximum FDI. The number of days with a very high FDR increased from 11 days in 2014–15 to 44 in 2018–19. The highest FDR over the period was severe, occurring on 11 days, including 4 days in 2016–17 and 3 days in 2018–19. The highest forecast FDI in the period was 73 in February 2019. Climate change is expected to increase both average and severe FDI in the future. 318 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION 1 Emergency Services Agency, 2019, Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024, ACT Government, Canberra. This section provides an assessment of the occurrence of fire in the ACT including prescribed burns and bushfires. The occurrence of fire and its impacts is also discussed in sections 5.1 Climate change, 5.3 Air, 5.4 Land, 5.5 Biodiversity, and 5.6 Water. The following indicators are assessed: • F1: Area burnt in prescribed burns and bushfires • F2: Fire risk The ACT has a high risk of bushfires with large areas of forest in the Namadgi National Park, Tidbinbilla Reserve and the Lower Cotter Catchment. This risk extends to the Canberra urban area which is characterised by a mosaic of suburbs and bordering bushland, grassland and forests of the Canberra Nature Park. Fires are a natural occurrence in the Australian landscape, necessary to maintain the health of many native species and ecosystems. The ACT landscape has evolved with fire and Aboriginal people developed a sophisticated understanding and use of fire to manage land and resources and reduce bushfire risk.1 More information on the importance of fire to Aboriginal culture in the ACT, including cultural burning for land, biodiversity and heritage management, is in Chapter 2 Ngunnawal Country. Bushfires can have devastating impacts on biodiversity, as well as human settlements and the natural resources communities depend on. Such impacts are mainly the result of changes in fire occurrence and severity. Increased human sources of ignition, the suppression of natural fire to protect human life and assets, and prescribed burning practices for the management of fuel loads can change the natural fire regimes required for biodiversity and ecosystem health. In addition, increased periods of drought and higher temperatures have increased the risk of more frequent and severe fires. Changes to natural fire regimes and the increasing risk of fire occurrence have many potential social, environmental and economic impacts, such as: • increased occurrence of severe bushfires pose significant risks to human health through death and injury, and smoke pollution. • increased property and infrastructure loss, both in rural locations and Canberra’s suburbs in bushfire-prone areas. • changes to ecologically appropriate natural fire regimes can have significant impacts on the composition of vegetation communities and the ecosystems they support. • post-fire rainfall and runoff can degrade water quality affecting aquatic health and biodiversity. • degraded water quality in catchments and water storages, leading to increased treatment costs for water supply. • reduction in streamflow and inflows to water storages due to the increased uptake of water for plant regeneration. • loss of important heritage, particularly Aboriginal heritage sites, historic sites in rural areas, and damage to landscapes. • loss of agricultural buildings and infrastructure, crops and animals, and plantation forests, and • smoke from both bushfires and controlled burns increase air pollution, especially particulate matter and summer smog, which is particularly significant for those with asthma and chronic lung disease. 319 5.7 Fire.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Increasing bushfire risk in the ACT Climate change is increasing the risk from bushfires in the ACT. Higher average temperatures, reductions in rainfall, and increased occurrence of severe events such as heatwaves and storms (see section 5.1 Climate change) have led to more days of elevated fire danger conditions and longer and more severe bushfire seasons in the ACT. Typically, the ACT bushfire season occurs from the beginning of October until the end of March the following year. However, climate conditions in the ACT are leading to extensions of the fire season. For example, in 2018–19 the bushfire season commenced in September and was extended to the end of April in response to climate conditions, the longest fire season since 2003. The growth in the ACT’s population and extension of urban areas also increases the risk of fire impacting on people and property. Having more people living close to grassland, nature parks or other areas of vegetation means more houses and people within bushfire-prone areas.2 2 Emergency Services Agency, 2019, Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024, ACT Government, Canberra. Prescribed burning Prescribed burns are mainly used to reduce fuel loads (surface litter, bark and understorey shrubs). The objective is to reduce the risk of bushfires and potential impacts on people, property, infrastructure, ecosystems and environmental assets such as water catchments. Reduced fuel loads may also improve the effectiveness of fire-suppression activities during bushfire events. Fire-sensitive ecosystems and those still recovering from bushfires are generally excluded from fuel reduction burning. Ecological burns are undertaken to improve the condition of ecosystems and biodiversity. Ecological burns vary in size, frequency and patchiness to meet biodiversity and ecological outcomes. This is important where species and ecosystems depend on fire for regeneration and regrowth (see case studies: Grassland Earless Dragon and Grassland restoration in section 5.5 Biodiversity). Some fuel reduction burns can also have ecological outcomes, for example where vegetation communities are not exposed to fire for extended periods and are outside of their ecologically appropriate natural fire regimes. Cultural burns are also undertaken in the ACT. The need for cultural burns is determined by Traditional Custodians and Murumbung Rangers to meet cultural objectives for specific locations. The burns are conducted in consultation with Traditional Custodians. It is important that fuel reduction burns consider ecosystem and biodiversity requirements to ensure ecologically appropriate burning is undertaken. However, this can be difficult where property and asset protection is the main purpose of fuel reduction. The delivery of the prescribed burn program in the ACT is always limited by seasonal and climatic conditions. Increased temperatures and reduced rainfall in the ACT are making it more difficult to undertake burning activities, particularly in late autumn and spring. The current climate has not only reduced the period suitable for prescribed burns, but has also increased the likelihood of unpredictable weather occurring that may impact prescribed burns already underway. In addition to prescribed burning, the ACT Government undertakes a range of fuel reduction activities including slashing and mowing, grazing and the physical removal of fuels. 320 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report DATA TRENDS Indicator F1: Area burnt in prescribed burns and bushfires Since the devastating 2003 bushfires, which burnt an area of 164,000 hectares, there have been no large bushfires in the ACT (Figure 1). The annual area of vegetation burnt in bushfires since 2003 has mostly been under 100 hectares except for 591 hectares in 2004, 1,474 hectares in 2006, and 443 hectares in 2018. Since 2003, the area subject to prescribed burning has far exceeded that of bushfires, accounting for 94% of the 45,000 hectares burnt between 2004 and April 2019. During the reporting period (2015 to 2019), over 13,000 hectares were burnt in total with prescribed burns responsible for 96% (12,540 hectares) of the total area burnt (Figures 1 and 2). Bushfires burnt around 530 hectares with most fires burning only small areas, with two exceptions: the 204-hectare Pierces Creek fire in November 2018, caused by an abandoned vehicle being set alight in an act of arson; and a fire in Namadgi National Park in March 2018, caused by a prescribed burn re-ignition which burnt around 200 hectares. 0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7 ,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 Prescribed burn 2003 bushfires burnt 164,000 hectares (70% of the ACT) Hectares Bushfire Figure 1: Area of prescribed burns and bushfires in the ACT, 2003 to April 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Bushfires include all non-prescribed fire in any vegetation type. 321 5.7 Fire.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Figure 2: Area of prescribed fires and bushfires in the ACT, 2015 to April 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Bushfires include all non-prescribed fire in any vegetation type. 322 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Prescribed burning 3 2009 is the first year of available data for ecological/cultural burns. The vast majority of prescribed burns in the ACT are undertaken for fuel reduction purposes (Figure 3). Between 2009 and April 2019, fuel reduction burns accounted for 99% (around 31,500 hectares) of all prescribed burns in the ACT.3 Ecological and cultural burning has increased in the ACT (Figure 4). The period 2015 to April 2019 saw a large growth in ecological burning with 270 hectares treated, although this only accounted for 2% of all prescribed burns. In addition, 10 hectares were burnt for both cultural and ecological reasons (multiple purpose) and one hectare for cultural purposes only. These results demonstrate the ACT’s growing recognition of the importance of fire for vegetation, biodiversity and cultural management. 0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7 ,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Fuel reduction Hectares Ecological/Cultural Figure 3: Area of prescribed burns by purpose in the ACT, 2009 to April 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: 2009 represents the first year of available data for ecological/cultural burns. 323 5.7 Fire.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Ecological Hectares Ecological/Cultural Cultural Figure 4: Area of ecological and cultural prescribed burns in the ACT, 2009 to April 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: 2009 represents the first year of available data for ecological/cultural burns. Cultural burning. Source: OCSE. 324 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Causes of bushfires 4 Emergency Services Agency, 2019, Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024, ACT Government, Canberra. Bushfires are started by natural causes such as lightning, and by human causes. Human-caused ignitions include deliberate acts such as arson and illegal burning-off, as well as through accidents or careless acts. They also include ignitions from power lines, motor vehicles, campfires, motor vehicle accidents and sparks from machinery. Between 2004 and April 2019, arson accounted for 45% of all non-prescribed burn ignitions in the ACT, compared to 16% for lightning and 10% for accidents (Figure 5). These results show that most fires in the ACT are deliberately lit. For many fires, however, the cause cannot be ascertained with unknown ignition source fires accounting for nearly 30% of the total fires recorded between 2004 and April 2019. Accident (10%) Arson (45%) Lightning (16%) Unknown (29%) Figure 5: Ignition sources for all ACT bushfires, 2004 to April 2019. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Note: Bushfires include all non-prescribed fire in any vegetation type. Unknown/other includes one prescribed burn re-ignite in 2018. Indicator F2: Fire risk The Fire Danger Index (FDI) assesses the potential severity of bushfire occurrence given the predicted conditions. The FDI reflects the difficulty of suppression should a fire occur, and also the risk to community, property and landscape. FDI is determined by the Bureau of Meteorology based on forecast air temperature, relative humidity and wind speed, along with drought conditions and soil moisture levels. It should be noted that FDI does not reflect the observed conditions on the day, which may differ from those forecasted. The FDI is used to determine the Fire Danger Rating which provides a simplified indication of potential fire consequences (Table 1). The FDI expresses bushfire potential using a number scale. An FDI of 1 means a very low risk of fire occurring and that it will be easy to control; an FDI of 100 means that fires will have the potential to be so severe that control is virtually impossible. Elevated fire danger conditions (severe, extreme or catastrophic) occur when the FDI is greater than 50. Days of elevated fire danger conditions are not common in the ACT, averaging less than three days a year, usually in January.4 However, climate change is expected to increase both average and severe FDI in the future. 325 5.7 Fire.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Table 1: Fire Danger Index scores and Fire Danger Ratings used for fire risk in the ACT Fire Danger Index range Fire Danger Rating 100 – 1,000 6 Catastrophic 75 – 99 5 Extreme 50 – 74 4 Severe 25 – 49 3 Very High 12 – 24 2 High 0 – 11 1 Low–Moderate Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Over the 2014–15 to 2018–19 period, the average and maximum FDIs have increased (Figure 6). Whilst this timeframe is too short to suggest an ongoing trend, it does show a growing fire danger in the ACT over the period. The 2018–19 fire season had the highest fire danger over the reporting period, with the greatest number of very high and high days, and the highest maximum FDI. The data also shows that: • the number of days with a very high FDR showed the greatest increase over the period, from 11 days in 2014–15 to 44 in 2018–19. • the highest FDR over the period was severe, occurring on 11 days including 4 days in 2016–17 and 3 days in 2018–19; extreme and catastrophic ratings were not forecast. • the highest forecast FDI in the period was 73, occurring in February 2019, followed by 72 in January 2019, and 63 occurring in both February 2018 and January 2017, and • days of high, very high and severe FDR occur most often in January (104 days), followed by December (93 days). 0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 2018–19 2017–18 2016–17 2015–16 2014–15 Low-moderate Number of days Fire Danger Index score High Very high Severe Average FDI MaxFDI Figure 6: Number of days in Fire Danger Rating categories, and average and maximum Fire Danger Index scores in the ACT, 2014–15 to 2018–19. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Note: Only includes data from each fire season which is between 1 October and 30 April, except for 2018–19 which commenced on 1 September. 326 05 Indicators, condition and trends.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY DEVELOPING A RESIDUAL RISK APPROACH TO FIRE MANAGEMENT IN THE ACT Source: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate The ACT Government is developing a new residual risk approach to inform bushfire management. Residual risk describes the amount of bushfire risk which remains after bushfires and prescribed burning activities have reduced fuel loads. The approach not only informs managers where fuel management activities will have the greatest effect in reducing risk to life, property and the environment, but also enables assessments of the effectiveness of fuel reduction activities already undertaken. Residual risk is assessed using computer modelling to generate bushfire simulations across the entire ACT and surrounding areas of NSW. These simulations estimate fire behaviour and are based on fuel load changes following prescribed burning and previous bushfires. The potential impacts on life and property that remain after fuel reduction is called the residual risk. If residual risk is 100%, there has been no fire in the landscape and no fuel reduction activities undertaken. This results in a maximum risk of potential fire impacts on life and property. If residual risk is at 50%, the potential risk is reduced by about half. Whilst it is not possible to completely remove all bushfire risk, the ACT’s fuel management program is focused on maintaining a residual risk of between 30% and 50%. Results for residual risk modelling are shown in Figure 7. The 2003 bushfires reduced the residual risk in the ACT from 85% to 11%. However, as vegetation recovers and fuel loads increase, so does the residual risk. Since the 2003 fires, prescribed burning activities to reduce fuel loads, in both ACT and NSW, have kept the residual risk to below 35%, well within the ACT residual risk target. Based on modelling outcomes, if there is no fuel reduction, residual risk is estimated to increase to over 60% by 2030. 0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7 ,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 Residual Risk Residual Risk (%) Residual Risk (%) ACT Bushfire 2003 bushfires burnt 164,000 hectares (70% of the ACT) NSW Bushfire ACT prescribed NSW prescribed Figure 7: Fire residual risk and ACT region prescribed burns and bushfires, 2002 to 2018. Data sourced from: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. 327 5.7 Fire.
06 ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES IN THE ACT Source: https://matthewsherrenphotography.com/ Section contents Introduction 329 Climate Change 337 Waste 345 Air 352 Land 353 Biodiversity 357 Water 368 Fire 374 328.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report INTRODUCTION 1 Althaus, C., P. Bridgman and G. Davis, 2013, The Australian Policy Handbook, Allen and Unwin, Sydney. 2 In this reporting period: • a review was conducted of the Climate Change Action Plan 2 Implementation Plan • two separate independent audits have been undertaken into the operations of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act 1999 (EPBC Act) for strategic assessments associated with developments and Matters of National Environmental Significance in Gungahlin and the Molonglo Valley • a report on the Lower Cotter Catchment restoration works (after 2003) has been presented to the government • a report was provided on the status of the ACT plastic shopping bag ban • issues papers have been developed on – climate change and sport, and – the growing interest in the circular economy, and • submissions have been made on other discrete matters, all of which are on the OCSE website. 3 Cited in Marks, K., 2016, ‘New power new realities’, Griffith Review: Imagining the Future, 52: 66. 4 Cited in Marks, K., 2016, ‘New power new realities’, Griffith Review: Imagining the Future, 52: 67. ‘Policies are theories of the world: some flourish while others wither. The better the designed the theory, the more tested its assumptions, the greater the chance of success. Process helps with design and more rigorous testing, but it does not substitute for substance.’1 State of the Environment reports routinely examine government responses to environmental sustainability issues. Since the publication of the ACT’s State of the Environment 2015 report, OCSE annual reports have tracked the status of recommendations and the ACT Government has been provided with other reports and policy recommendations.2 Policy complexity – environment and sustainability ACT environment policy is complex: it provides opportunities for leadership and change management. The former Minister for Climate Change in the ACT, Simon Corbell, observed that sub-national governments had the policy levers to drive change on decarbonisation. ‘We control energy policy, we control building policy, we control transport policy and service provision’.3 Climate scientist Professor Will Steffen (The Australian National University) has called for ‘stretch’ goals suggesting that policy which supports decarbonisation should be used to ‘build a better society’.4 Environmental policy works across complex systems from biodiversity to climate change and energy. It has to be responsive to the motivational complexity of the community and to the pragmatic concerns of business. Governance is not simple as many portfolios have an interest in environmental issues. Those who advise on environmental policy come from different disciplinary perspectives. Academics have routinely called for a ‘systems theory’ approach to environmental policy development. The SDGs reflect this approach in international contexts. Government, administrators, scientists, other researchers, and the community, need to navigate this complexity in times of significant change and challenge, and government leadership is critical. In the ACT the community is interested and active, and wants to be consulted on policy development and implementation. This raises consultation and communication challenges for cross-portfolio responsibilities. 329 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report THE INTERLINKED NATURE OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY IN THE ACT Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019) is relevant to water, climate change, biodiversity, community and landscape resilience, urban planning, design and development. Biodiversity protection is impacted by cross-jurisdictional administrative questions on development, water provisioning, feral species and threatened species action plans. Climate change policy is expected to deliver on energy, as well as social equity concerns, housing and transport, to promote environmental, economic and social co-benefits. In respect of human settlements, the ACT’s waste policy needs to address dumping and economic concerns like variable regional fee structures. In this sector the ACT Government has worked with NSW to establish the Container Deposit legislation which was a complex legislative challenge affected by environmental and economic considerations.5 Waste management questions range from outer ministry concerns like rubbish collection to Treasury interests such as designing a circular economy in line with national government waste policy. Transport and pollen levels impact air quality and health, and solutions will differ and invoke different government, research, and operational contributions, from the EPA and the Health Directorate. Water policy responds to drinking water requirements and other household uses, as well as stormwater management and the promotion of water-sensitive urban design which is good for biodiversity outcomes and reducing the urban heat island effect. These policies respond to both climate change and city development concerns. 5 Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission, 2019, Final Report: Container Deposit Scheme Price Monitoring, Report no. 10, found at https://www.icrc.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/1407602/Container-Deposit-Scheme-Price-Monitori ng-Final-Report.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 6 Productivity Commission, 2009, Strengthening Evidence-based Policy in the Australian Federation, Canberra, found at https:// www.pc.gov.au/research/supporting/strengthening-evidence/roundtable-proceedings-volume2.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 7 Funfgeld, H. and D. McEvoy, 2013, Policy Brief: Framing Climate Change Adaptation in Policy Development and Implementation, Victorian Centre for Climate Change Adaptation Research, found at http://www.vcccar.org.au/sites/default/files/publications/ Framing%20adaptation%20policy%20brief%20August%202013.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019; Hussey, K. et al., 2013, Statutory Frameworks, Institutions and Policy Processes for Climate Adaptation, National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility, ANU, found at https://openresearch-repository.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/65488/2/01_Hussey_Statutory_ frameworks%2C_2013.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. Solutions to environmental issues will be both operational and strategic. Implementation plans might be in place but evaluating success or failure can be problematic for a range of reasons. Reductionism is not the way to manage environmental complexity, even though environmental policy will always involve a level of administrative separation. To be effective environmental policy will need to set clear objectives: be evidence based, transparent and accountable, subject to critical review and community input, and respond strategically.6 A multiplicity of policy interventions at the meta, conceptual or operational level will always be necessary.7 In the ACT environmental policy addresses change and embraces adaptive management. It also provides clarity and stability. Different from other sub-national jurisdictions, the ACT Government has as a major focus of its environment policy the interface between the environment and the city. In general, the ACT Government has mature and functioning environmental policy in place. Leadership has been shown on policy that addresses climate change, water, waste, biodiversity, and community engagement, where best practice methods such as ‘deliberative democracy’ are being tested. Policy integration continues to test resolve, and evolve and mature. 330 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy clarity and stability 8 2017–18 Minister’s Annual Report Under the Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/1296597/2017-18-Ministers-Annual-Report-under-t he-Climate-Change-and-Greenhouse-Gas-Reduction-Act-2010.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 9 Macdonald-Smith, A., 25 October 2019, ‘Short-term Energy Fixes Don’t Help: Origin CEO’, Financial Review, found at https://www. afr.com/companies/energy/short-term-energy-fixes-don-t-help-origin-ceo-20191025-p5346y, accessed 29 October 2019. 10 Other businesses with energy interests in the ACT include FRV (Royalla Solar Farm), Windlab (Coonooer Bridge Wind Farm) and Reposit Power (battery storage); the remit continues to grow. Policy clarity and stability is important to successful outcomes. For example, in the ACT the response to climate change and the energy needs of the community has been legislated, regulated, supported by policy and then scrutinised and assessed. Implementation has involved community consultation. Outcomes have been informed by feedback and are subject to revision. Advancing accountability and transparency, the ACT Minister for Climate Change is required by statute to provide a formal report on emissions outcomes.8 Recognition of the need for certainty in energy policy is evident across the business, education and government sectors. For example, the CEO of Origin Energy recently called for clarity at the federal level because without it investment stalls.9 CASE STUDY NEOEN AND THE ACT Hornsdale Wind Farm, South Australia. Source: https://hornsdalewindfarm.com.au/ The ACT’s policy clarity on energy and climate change has seen the Territory celebrated as a leader by businesses such as NEOEN.10 NEOEN set up its office in Canberra and remained while federal policy vacillated. NEOEN continued to invest and expanded its operations to other jurisdictions as a direct consequence of ACT Government leadership and policy stability. NEOEN won contracts through the ACT’s large-scale wind reverse-auction and has established its Asia Pacific headquarters in the Territory. In 2015 NEOEN’s Hornsdale Wind Farm achieved Australia’s lowest contract price for renewables at $77 per megawatt hour. As well as committing to operate the Hornsdale facility from its Canberra-based Asia-Pacific Wind Development and Asset Management Office, NEOEN and Megawatt Capital provided a $12 million investment to the ACT Government’s Renewable Energy Innovation Fund, which supplies a comprehensive package of funding in support of Canberra-based renewable energy business and attracts new ventures to the Territory. A successful partnership with Canberra Institute of Technology (CIT) has enabled Canberra to deliver best-practice training to the national renewables industry. The CIT Renewable Energy Skills Centre offers courses accredited by the Global Wind Organisation for large-scale wind energy training. As renewables become more widely adopted, there is greater demand for trained staff to service the industry. CIT has taken the lead in preparing local and international multi-skilled graduates who are job-ready. CIT training has been undertaken by 45 students from across Australia and around the globe. 331 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy innovation in changing times 11 OCSE, 2017, OCSE Implementation Status Report on ACT Government’s Climate Change Policy, found at http://www. environmentcommissioner.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/1116324/CSE-ISR-Report-Aug2017_FA_AccPDF_c2.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 12 Found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1135876/20171019-Letter-from-ACT-Climate-Change-Cou ncil-to-Minister-Rattenbury-interim-targets.pdf accessed 13 October 2019. See Steffen W. et al, 2016, Land Carbon: No Substitute for Action on Fossil Fuels, Climate Council of Australia, found at https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/resources/land-carbon-report/ and https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/aadc6ea123523a46102e2be45bfcedc8.pdf,accessed 31 October 2019. Reflecting the need for innovation in times of transformation, the ACT Government has continued to fund and promote innovation through technology hubs, research funding, skills development, and innovative implementation strategies which even extend to reconsidering the economic propositions which underpin change. INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE  CIT sustainability precinct. Source: OCSE The ACT Government has provided technical back-up in support of its energy and climate policy by providing educational infrastructure. The sustainability precinct at CIT is a good example of the role government can play in innovation. Policy interventions also work to support business innovation through the Canberra Innovation Network. The social cost of carbon – rejection of the use of offsets in respect of emissions. In the OCSE review of the ACT Government’s 2012 Action Plan, AP2: A New Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan for the Australian Capital Territory, the use of offsets to achieve zero net emissions by 2045 was considered; the ACT Government was urged to consult the community and experts before adopting an offsets policy to address emissions.11 Scientists of the ACT Climate Change Council have consistently argued for the rejection of the use of offsets to meet emissions targets.12 In its Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 the ACT Government has rejected the use of carbon offsets to achieve net zero emissions by 2045. The ACT Government will invest an interim price of $20 per tonne of emissions from government operations into measures to meet the Zero Emissions Government target from 2020–21 and arrange for an independent body to develop a social cost of carbon (SCC). 332 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report This is an ambitious key priority in the Strategy. Assessments of SCC require a careful calibration of ‘cost’, and damages associated with emissions have been difficult to estimate. For example, it is difficult to completely attribute the cost of respiratory disease with absolute certainty; assessment of the implications of heat and precipitation extremes can be complex; and the rising value of ecosystems due to increased ‘scarcity’ are difficult to determine. It is also difficult to factor in adaptation.13 Some argue that such challenges should only increase the desire to establish a SCC to better inform policy,14 and guidance can be found in the Obama administration’s establishment of an Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases (IWG 2009–2017).15 The ACT Government’s commitment to exploring the use of a SCC is ambitious and leading-edge policy innovation. 13 Institute for Policy Integrity, New York University School of Law, 2019, A Lower Bound: Why the Social Cost of Carbon Does Not Capture Critical Climate Damages and What That Means for Policymakers, found at https://policyintegrity.org/files/publications/ Lower_Bound_Issue_Brief.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. 14 Pindyck, R.S., 2013, ‘Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?’, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, Boston, found at https://www.nber.org/papers/w19244.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. 15 For the history of SCC in the USA, see Laity, J., 2017, ‘Federal Actions on Valuing Climate Impacts’, NAS Public Symposium on Updating the Social Cost of Carbon and Valuing Climate Damages, found at http://sites.nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/dbassesite/ documents/webpage/dbasse_180945.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. For a discussion about the SCC see, Shelanski, H. and Obstfeld, M., 2 July 2015, Estimating the Benefits from Carbon Dioxide Emission Reductions, White House Blog, Washington, found at https:// obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2015/07/02/estimating-benefits-carbon-dioxide-emissions-reductions, accessed 31 October 2019; Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government, 2015, Response to Comments: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866 , found at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ files/omb/inforeg/scc-response-to-comments-final-july-2015.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. Also see Paul, I., P. Howard, and J. A. Schwartz, 2017, The Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases and State Policy. A Frequently Asked Questions Guide, Institute for Policy Integrity, New York University School of Law, found at https://policyintegrity.org/files/publications/SCC_ State_Guidance.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. States in the USA that are using the SCC in their calculations of the otherwise hidden costs of emissions include California, Colorado, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Washington, Minnesota, Nevada, New Jersey, New York. Note that on 28 March 2017, President Trump rescinded the Obama administration’s calculation of the SCC, requiring calculations to be redone and ordering the use of procedures from 2003 when developing regulations. See Revkin, A., 24 August 2017, ‘Trump’s Attack on Social Cost of Carbon Could End Up Hurting his Fossil Fuel Push’, ProPublica, found at https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/08/ trump-s-attack-social-cost-carbon-could-end-hurting-his-fossil-fuel-push, accessed 31 October 2019; Environmental Defense Fund blog, ‘The True Cost of Carbon Pollution’, found at https://www.edf.org/true-cost-carbon-pollution, accessed 24 September 2019. 333 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy integration, continuity and maturity across sectors 16 Actsmart Schools is an EPSDD-based program and is the primary method in which in-school sustainability initiatives are developed and delivered. 17 Commentary provided by the Education Directorate: This SDG interrogates the number of countries that have integrated mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning into primary, secondary and tertiary curricula. 18 Measures the extent to which (i) global citizenship education, and (ii) education for sustainable development, including gender equality and human rights, is mainstreamed at all levels in (a) national education policies, (b) curricula, (c) teacher education and (d) student assessment. In the complex policy arena of environmental sustainability, integration is a significant challenge and the ability to work across portfolios is important both for everyday initiates and transformative change. Sound examples of integration for sustainable outcomes in the ACT include the collaboration of Actsmart and EPSDD and the Education Directorate, which have been partnering effectively with school communities for years to deliver sustainable schools programs. With the Education Directorate, the EPSDD’s Actsmart Schools supports civics through the Parliament of Youth on Sustainability and the 2019 ACT Schools Constitutional Convention. ACTSMART, EPSDD AND THE EDUCATION DIRECTORATE – SUSTAINABLE SCHOOLS AND CIVICS Farrer Primary School students in the school’s vegetable patch. Source: Farrer Primary School website. Since the State of the Environment 2015 report, the EPSDD has continued to deliver the Actsmart Schools program.16 There are currently 21 schools in the ACT accredited as ‘5 star’ schools, covering the five focus areas of waste, energy, water, school grounds and biodiversity, and curriculum. The program is delivered across government and non-government schools and 100% of primary and high schools and colleges have signed up. The program provides sustainability education for students (and their families), professional development opportunities for teachers, and resources to deliver the Australian Curriculum’s Sustainability Cross Curriculum Priority. The Education Directorate is committed to promoting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 13.3.1,17 4.7.1 and 12.8.1.18 In 2018, Actsmart Schools hosted the first Actsmart School Sustainability Awards. The Actsmart schools program provides support, demonstrations, ‘challenges’, practical guides, forums and conferences, active travel advice, and resources to manage energy and reduce emissions. It also awards best practice and celebrates its teaching champions. An example of the success of this collaboration is Farrer Primary School, where an environmental centre has been established. The Farrer school community is both learning from and teaching young people about food, waste, composting, animal husbandry, entomology (there is a ‘resident’ entomologist), sustainable gardening, collaborations, and the importance of group and individual action through the Green Team and Kids Teaching Kids. The school community is raising funds and contributing ideas and labour (the ‘Monday Parents’). 334 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy and research – the science policy interface 19 Jorgenson, B. et al., 2014, Final report: Facilitating the Use of Research in Policy Development and Implementation, Victorian Centre for Climate Change Adaptation Research (VCCCAR) , found at http://www.vcccar.org.au/sites/default/files/publications/Facilitating%20 the%20use%20of%20research%20in%20policy%20development%20and%20implementation.pdf, accessed on 26 October 2019. 20 2010 ACT Kangaroo Management Plan, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/ assets/pdf_file/0020/902423/Kangaroo_Management_Plan_complete_for_web.pdf accessed on 29 October 2019; 2017 Nature Conservation (Eastern Grey Kangaroo) Controlled Native Species Management Plan, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/di/2017-37/default.asp, accessed 20 October 2019. 21 https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/View/ni/2018-141/current/PDF/2018-141.PDF, accessed 20 October 2019. 22 http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/ni/2017-224/default.asp, accessed 29 October 2019. In environmental policy settings the challenges associated with the science–policy interface have been the subject of decades of critical scrutiny.19 In relation to biodiversity policy, the benefits of certainty and stability have to blend with the operational and research needs to continuously monitor and evaluate – and be actively responsive, flexible and adaptive to inform, monitor, evaluate, and address change and ‘shocks’. In the ACT many environmental policies link academic research, operational efforts, and administrative requirements. Important management plans and strategies have been caucused, designed, reviewed, updated, and discussed with and informed by citizen scientists and NGOs. SCIENCE AND POLICY INTEGRATION: KANGAROOS – CONTROLLED NATIVE SPECIES MANAGEMENT PLANS (2010 AND 2017) Kangaroo numbers were first described as a problem by Commissioner Maxine Cooper in 2009 who recommended a management strategy. Since that time adaptive management, predicated on scientific monitoring and evaluation has informed the ACT Government policy response and the kangaroo has been declared a ‘controlled native species’ under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. The ACT’s Conservator of Flora and Fauna has developed and released two management plans in respect of populations of the Eastern Grey Kangaroo (2010 and 2017).20 Community consultation informed the 2017 Plan. Two notifiable instruments regulate management: • Nature Conservation (Eastern Grey Kangaroo) Conservation Culling Calculator 201821 • Nature Conservation (Eastern Grey Kangaroo) Rural Culling Calculator22 Scientific research informs the program and adaptive management methodologies are used. Environmental grazing pressures have been considered. The Conservator of Flora and Fauna implements the plans, oversees monitoring and grants the necessary licences. 335 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy and the community Community engagement can bring environmental concerns into sharp relief and assist with resolution. Citizen science is critical to monitoring in the ACT and community knowledge feeds into policy development across the spectrum. COMMUNITY CONSULTATION In 2012 the ACT’s Social Compact promoted citizen participation and the relationship between government and the community. In 2018, 54 members of the ACT’s Citizen’s Forum were invited to reflect on what constituted a ‘better suburb’. The Better Suburbs Statement 2030 was the outcome. Lakes, ponds and wetlands were ranked most urgent. Tree canopy and waste were considered the second most urgent issues. Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019) responds to those concerns. In 2019 the ACT Government produced the Whole of Government Communications and Engagement Plan which focuses on environment, land and planning, and transport. The ACT web portal YourSay routinely invites comment. The ACT Community Panel builds on this with community surveys. Deliberative democracy has been trialled. The Minister for Planning recently involved the Young Planners Association in the design of the Ministerial Planning Statement. Community roundtables informed the development of the ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25. Maintaining the benefits of community involvement, the ACT Government has continued to fund environmental NGOs including the Environmental Defenders Office (ACT), the ACT and Region Community Council, SEE-Change, the Conservation Council, and the Canberra Environment Centre. Hackathon working group. Source: OCSE. 336 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CLIMATE CHANGE 23 EPSDD, 2012, AP2: A New Climate Strategy and Action Plan for the Australian Capital Territory, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/581136/AP2_Sept12_PRINT_NO_CROPS_SML.pdf, accessed 4 September 2019. 24 Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010 (ACT) and Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction (Interim Targets) Determination 2018. 25 Found at https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2019/09/apo-nid259121-1386811.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 26 https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2019/09/apo-nid259131-1386826.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 27 OCSE, 2017, Implementation Status Report on ACT Government’s Climate Change Policy, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/investigations/implementation-status-report, accessed 28 August 2019. 28 Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability, 2018, Government Response to the Implementation Status Report on ACT Government’s Climate Change Policy, Legislative Assembly for the ACT, Canberra, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/__ data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1168445/Statement-of-Government-Response-to-the-Implementation-Status-Report-on-ACT-Gover nment_s-Climate-Change-Policy.pdf, accessed 24 September 2019. Overview The ACT Government has led the way on climate change policy in Australia for the last decade. The most recent ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 reinforces the territory’s commitment to scientific research and community engagement, clear goals and targets, and innovation. Policy context The ACT Government’s first action plan, Climate Change Strategy: Weathering the Change was established in 2007. Promoting accountability, the Minister provides a report to the ACT community and Legislative Assembly on climate change action pursuant to section 15, Climate Change and Greenhouse Reduction Act 2010. The ACT Government legislated its emission reduction targets in 2010 and periodically updates them. Policy consolidation was achieved with the 2012 AP2: A New Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan for the Australian Capital Territory.23 The Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) Australian Climate Leadership Award for Best Renewable Target by an Australian City was awarded to Canberra in 2016. In 2018 a series of interim emissions reduction targets and a 2045 target date for net zero emissions were adopted.24 Climate policy has economic implications. The ACT was the only jurisdiction buying renewables from 2013 to 2016. The reverse-auction methodology is anticipated to leverage more than $500 million in local investment over 20 years: • around 2 gigawatts (GW) of renewable electricity is managed from Canberra’s renewable energy precinct • the Renewables Innovation Hub is funded, and • the ACT has a $12 million Renewable Energy Innovation Fund (REIF). The ACT will meet its 100% renewable energy target in 2020 and in 2018–19 legislated to maintain the target on an ongoing basis. Policy continuity is embedded. Actions carried over from earlier policy have been incorporated into the ACT Climate Strategy 2019–2525 and Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019).26 OCSE commentary Implementation Status Review of AP2 The OCSE undertook independent reviews of the 2012 AP2 strategy in 2014 and 2017.27 The 2017 review observed sound implementation progress, particularly in relation to renewable energy. Government agreed to 16 of the 17 recommendations. Recommendation 12 which required energy productivity and/or efficiency targets to be identified in conjunction with emissions reduction targets at 5 to 10 year intervals out to 2050 was ‘noted’.28 337 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy development In 2016 the ACT Government established its climate change adaptation strategy consistent with the Commonwealth’s Climate Adaptation Outlook: A Proposed National Adaptation Assessment Framework.29 The aims of the strategy were to reduce vulnerability and increase resilience. Adaption priorities were identified. Households, businesses and government were encouraged to assess climate risks and prepared for extreme weather events. Policy and programs were designed to further the strategy and five priority sectors were identified: • disaster and emergency management • community health and wellbeing • settlements and infrastructure • water, and • natural resources and ecosystems. Innovation, integration and cross-agency coordination, monitoring and evaluation were highlighted and 27 high priority, short-term actions were proposed (2017–2020). An Implementation Plan (2017–2020) was endorsed by the Adaptation Steering Committee.30 Progress is reported.31 ACT Climate Change Strategy and Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City The ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 and Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City (2019)32 have involved extensive consultation and engagement. Commitments include: • legislating 100% renewables in electricity supply in perpetuity • developing a plan for achieving zero emissions from gas use by 2045 • rejection of offsets for achieving emissions reduction targets in government operations • adopting a social cost of carbon for emissions from Government operations • delivering all-electric government buildings and schools • transitioning to a zero emissions bus fleet by 2040 29 Department of the Environment and Energy, 2013, Climate Adaptation Outlook: A Proposed National Adaptation Assessment Framework, found at https://www.environment.gov.au/climate-change/adaptation/publications/climate-adaptation-outlook, accessed 4 September 2019. 30 The Adaptation Steering Committee changed to the Climate Change Steering Committee, disbanded in December 2018 31 2017–18 Minister’s Annual Report Under the Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/1296597/2017-18-Ministers-Annual-Report-under-t he-Climate-Change-and-Greenhouse-Gas-Reduction-Act-2010.pdf, accessed 29 August 2019 32 Both strategies are outside the reporting period of this report. 33 More information on the ACT Climate Change Council can be found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cc/ act-climate-change-council, accessed 29 October 2019. • achieving 30% tree canopy cover (or equivalent) and 30% permeable surfaces within the urban footprint by 2045 • developing an urban forest strategy, and • completing inventory and mapping of living infrastructure to value public urban living infrastructure assets. While developing the Strategy, the 2018 Emission Reduction Targets (from 1990 levels) were updated in accordance with advice from the ACT Climate Change Council.33 The ACT now aims to reach 100% emissions reduction – zero net emissions – by 2045. Interim targets which promote periodic review have also been set: • 40% below 1990 levels by 2020 (the ACT is on track to achieve this) • 50–60% below 1990 levels by 2025 • 65–75% below 1990 levels by 2030 • 90–95% below 1990 levels by 2040, and • net zero emissions by 2045 (previously 2050). Transport – electrifying the vehicles of the ACT and active travel Once 100% renewable electricity is achieved in 2020, transport will comprise over 60% of the ACT’s greenhouse gas emissions. Private car travel will be the largest contributor to these emissions. The ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 includes transport emissions initiatives to: • improve public transport to provide an extensive, user-friendly light rail and bus network that is well integrated with active travel options and supported by an expanded network of Park and Ride facilities. • plan for a compact and efficient city to improve access to public transport and active travel options. • make the best use of roads, with a greater focus on moving people and goods. • support active travel, including the use of electric bikes, by improving the quality and safety of cycling and walking infrastructure. • transition to a zero emissions bus fleet by 2040. 338 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 2019 Draft Transport Strategy Transport for Canberra: Transport for a Sustainable City 2012–2031 is currently under review. The last progress report was issued in 2014. A draft ‘Integrated Transport Strategy: Moving Canberra’ was released for public consultation in 2019 and is expected to be finalised in 2020. An Implementation Plan is anticipated. Reflecting the need for policy integration, consultation has been undertaken on climate change, planning, the bus network, and light rail. Submissions have been invited and received from the community and expert groups such as Engineers Australia.34 Issues include: meeting community expectations, planning for integrated transport options, setting targets, adopting a mixed transport fleet, monitoring, regarding mobility as a service, linking infrastructure to services and technology, and providing information which is useful to users. Moving Canberra provides for: 1. The involvement of all relevant Directorates – Transport Canberra and City Services (TCCS), EPSDD, Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development (CMTEDD), Access Canberra, Justice and Community Safety (JACS) and Education – and the biannual review of governance arrangements to ensure accountability, policy review and alignment. 2. Reviewing practice to ensure implementation meets aspirations, for example, of the bike share trial. 3. Promotion of micro-mobility opportunities such as the involvement of schools in encouraging more walk and ride to school programs. 4. Building on Park and Ride and Bike and Ride schemes. 5. Working with the Civil Aviation Safety Authority on the use of delivery drones. 6. Finding ways to expand car share initiatives. 7. Implementing cycling infrastructure changes and using the Safe System Assessment Framework in the future and retrospectively. 8. Deploying technology to produce better outcomes such as a cashless public transport systems, a new fare structures system, an integrated journey planner, making Mobility as a Service (MaaS) technology available, providing an Active Travel Infrastructure Practitioners Tool, linking with GovHack and creating awareness about accessibility of data (including developing a White Paper). 34 Engineers Australia, 2019, Moving Canberra 2019–2045: Response to the Integrated Transport Strategy, Canberra, found at https://www.engineersaustralia.org.au/sites/default/files/resources/Public%20Affairs/2019/Moving%20Canberrra%20 Integrated%20Transport%20Strategy%20(ACT%2C%20March%202019).docx.pdf, accessed on 29 October 2019. 35 EPSDD, 2018, The ACT’s Transition to Zero Emission Vehicles, Action Plan 2018–21, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/1188498/2018-21-ACTs-transition-to-zero-emissio ns-vehicles-Action-Plan-ACCESS.pdf, accessed 28 August 2019. 36 Electric Vehicle Council, 2019, State of Electric Vehicles, found at https://electricvehiclecouncil.com.au/wp-content/ uploads/2019/09/State-of-EVs-in-Australia-2019.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 9. Updating regulations to promote change, including the Canberra Streetscape guidelines, the Territory Plan, the Estate Development Code and the Municipal Infrastructure Standards. 10. Careful scrutiny of the costs of new light rail opportunities. 11. Development of business hubs to reduce the need for travel. 12. Considering the possibility of the Canberra Train Station being developed as a Transit Oriented Development (TOD). ACT’s Transition to Zero Emissions Vehicles Action Plan 2018–2021 The Cities Power Partnership was launched in Canberra in July 2017. The ACT has pledged to act on renewable energy, energy efficiency, renewable energy benchmarks for new developments, the uptake of electric vehicles, and emissions reduction targets. In 2018 the ACT Government won the Cities Power Sustainable Transport Award with the Zero Emissions Vehicles Action Plan.35 Actions include: • a zero emission fleet (where fit for purpose) – 50% of all newly leased fleet passenger vehicles will be zero emissions by 2019–20, and all newly leased passenger vehicles will be zero emission vehicles from 2020–21. • all new multi-unit and mixed-use developments to install vehicle charging infrastructure. • facilitating installation of charging stations on major routes to and from Canberra. • zero emissions vehicles using transit lanes until 2023, and • investigation of incentives to encourage the use of electric bikes in place of cars. Along with South Australia, the ACT community currently purchases the largest number of electric vehicles in Australia, but overall the numbers remain low.36 339 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Active Travel 37 https://www.transport.act.gov.au/about-us/active-travel?a=888712, accessed 29 October 2019 38 https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1382383/MIS05-Active-Travel-Facilities-Design.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 39 Found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/planning-our-city/territory_plan/draft_variations_to_the_territory_plan 40 Transport Canberra and City Services, 2019, Planning for Active Travel in the ACT: Active Travel Infrastructure Interim Planning Guide, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1378545/Planning-for- Active-Travel-in-the-ACT.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 41 World Green Building Council, 2019, Bringing Embodied Carbon Upfront, found at https://www.worldgbc.org/bringing-embodied- carbon-upfront-report-webform, accessed 22 November 2019. 42 Australian Property Council, 2019, ‘Every Building Counts. A Practical Plan for Emissions Reduction’, found at https://www.everybuildingcounts.com.au/, accessed 30 October 2019. 43 See https://www.planning.act.gov.au/build-buy-renovate/reviews-and-reforms/building-reforms, accessed 13 September 2019. In 2016, the ACT introduced the Building and Construction Amendment Act 2016 which included 43 reform actions. Progress reports are required. Community was involved. Reforms include: • improving documentation at the building approval stage • implementing a more relevant and comprehensive building inspection and audit process • improving licensing requirements for builders and building surveyors • providing better information for consumers and practitioners, and • establishing stronger, more comprehensive standards of practice and contracting.  Promoting active travel in Canberra. Source: OCSE. Active Travel in the ACT is promoted by the Active Travel Framework and Strategic Cycle Network Plan37 and will link to Municipal Infrastructure Standard 05 – Active Travel Facilities Design (MIS05).38 Innovative links are being forged with the Health Directorate. The Territory Plan (TP) will be varied to ensure active travel considerations are incorporated into all development applications. Rules and criteria are being established. The TP variation is intended to complement the Active Living Principles variation and the current Bicycle Parking General Code. Bicycle Parking General Code of the TP is being varied by the introduction of an End-of-Trip Facilities (bicycle parking, shower and change facilities, lockers and drying areas) General Code.39 An extensive ‘road map’ is provided in Planning for Active Travel in the ACT: Active Travel Infrastructure Interim Planning Guide (April 2019).40 Building standards and government buildings programs The gap between design intent and building performance is a key tension in building regulation. The World Green Building Council, in its 2019 report Bringing Embodied Carbon Upfront,41 and the Australian Property Council are just two peak bodies which see emission reduction opportunities in building design as critical, even if often overlooked.42 In the ACT a number of process-driven changes have been made.43 340 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Housing Choices Project and Demonstration Housing Project – community engagement Housing Choices began with a discussion paper in 2017 inviting community comment. 44 A deliberative democracy process and a collaboration hub were adopted. The hub included 38 randomly selected Canberrans and made 13 recommendations across 8 themes including environment (Recommendations 5 and 6), quality of construction (Recommendation 10), and quality of design (Recommendation 11). A draft TP variation will implement some of the recommendations.45 Diversity and mandatory minimum standards for living (green and blue) infrastructure in zones RZ1 to RZ5 as well as updates to some of the TP residential codes and the definitions are foreshadowed. A Demonstration Housing Project has emerged, involving community in innovative planning, design and delivery.46 In 2018, six proposals were selected which included co-housing, micro terraces, compact units and affordable housing models.47 2019 saw a second call for submissions. Design Review Panel The National Capital Design Review Panel (DRP), a joint initiative of the ACT Government and the National Capital Authority, has been operating on an interim basis in Canberra since 2017. The DRP has provided guidance on 26 proposals. The Planning and Development (Design Review Panel) Amendment Bill 2019 now formalises the panel’s role.48 Buildings of five or more storeys must go before a panel (post 1 October 2019). 44 EPSDD, 2017, Housing Choices Discussion Paper, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws. com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/6015/1063/8006/Housing_Choices_Discussion_Paper_3Nov2017.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 45 The Collaboration Hub’s report is found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay. files/1915/3290/7795/Housing_Choices_Collaboration_Hub_Report_1_002.pdf. The ACT Government response (2018) to the Hub’s recommendations is found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay. files/5215/3740/2339/Housing-Choices-and-Collaboration-Hub-_Government_Response.pdf, accessed 13 September 2019. 46 ACT Government, 2018, ‘Summary of Successful Demonstration Housing ‘with a site’ proposals’, https://www.planning.act.gov.au/topics/current_projects/demonstration-housing, accessed 13 September 2019 47 An example of the sort of development being promoted by the policy can be found at Echo Inc’s website, found at https://www.echohousing.org.au/new-blog/summary-of-successful-demonstration-housing-with-a-site-proposals, accessed 29 October 2019. Summary document found here https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0009/1360719/summary-of-successful-demonstration-housing-proposals.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 48 https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/b/db_60089/, accessed 29 October 2019. Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 and zero emissions buildings – policy continuity and innovation Elements of the ‘zero emissions’ building policy from Action Plan 2 have been incorporated into the 2019 Climate Change Strategy and include: • implementing higher minimum energy performance and climate resilience standards for new buildings to deliver efficient, zero emissions buildings. • facilitating demonstration projects showcasing zero (or negative) emissions climate-wise homes. • developing a new residential energy assessment tool that assesses the year-round thermal performance of buildings in the Canberra climate. • trialling incentives and other measures to encourage all-electric, high-efficiency apartment and commercial buildings. • developing a plan to transition buildings from gas supply. • introducing mandatory disclosure of energy performance for all rental properties and legislate requirements by 2021. • ensuring all newly constructed public housing properties are all electric from 2019. • continuing to deliver the solar-for-low-income program and investigate options for providing solar to public housing. • trialling the facilitation of access to interest-free loans or other innovative finance for gas to electric upgrades and deep retrofits of low-income homes. 341 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report ACT carbon-neutral government framework – building on achievements AP2 committed the ACT Government to achieving carbon neutrality in its own operations by 2020.49 This commitment was supported by energy efficiency and greenhouse gas reduction projects and an interest-free loan fund for directorates, repaid through energy savings. Since 2010, $17.5 million has been expended on 34 projects including lighting, ventilation and heating upgrades and off-grid solar systems and battery storage systems. Annual savings are approximately $2.6 million. Between 2012–13 and 2017–18, ACT Government greenhouse gas emissions have fallen by 27%, while service delivery has increased. Without using offsets, the ACT’s climate change strategy for 2019–2025 imposes targets: • to achieve at least a 33% reduction in emissions from government operations by 2025 (from 2020 levels), and • to achieve zero emissions from government operations by 2040. Actions in the ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 which relate to ACT Government emissions include: • investigating the use of innovative finance options such as Energy Performance Contracting as a method of reducing costs and emissions in Government assets. • investing an interim price of $20 per tonne of emissions from government operations into measures to meet the Zero Emissions Government target from 2020–21, and arrange for an independent body to develop a social cost of carbon for application from 2025. • ensuring all newly built or newly leased government buildings and facilities are all-electric and climate-wise (where fit for purpose). • replacing all space and water heating systems in government facilities with electric systems at the end of their economic lives (where fit for purpose). • establishing a pathway to zero emissions ACT Government schools supported by an interim emissions reduction plan to 2025. • establishing and implementing a pathway to zero emissions in the ACT Government health sector by 2040 informed by an assessment of all current and planned public health facilities. 49 Action Plan 2 ACT found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/581136/AP2_Sept12_PRINT_NO_ CROPS_SML.pdf accessed on 2 December 2019. 50 Detail found at http://2degreeshub.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/REIF-Direct-Grants.pdf accessed on 2 December 2019. • developing and implementing a road map for transitioning Transport Canberra buses to zero emissions by 2040 at the latest. • ensuring all newly leased ACT Government passenger fleet vehicles will be zero emissions vehicles from 2020–21 (where fit for purpose). By 2020–21 the ACT Government will source all its electricity from renewable sources. However, government operations will continue to generate emissions from natural gas used for space and water heating and from transport fuel use. Investment, innovation and industry development – government incentives and sponsorship The Chief Minister Treasury and Economic Development Directorate (CMTEDD) is pursuing investment opportunities and driving innovation for renewable energy. The ACT Government’s Priority Investment Program is a competitive grant program which promotes research and industry collaboration. The Renewable Innovation Hub was established and Innovation Connect facilitates these innovations. The Hub serves 80 members, 30 businesses, and has held 150 industry events to date. The $12 million Renewable Energy Innovation Fund (REIF) provides funding to help local start-ups to develop and commercialise new technology.50 REIF contributes up to $5 million towards an $8 million research program on battery storage at the Energy Change Institute at the Australian National University. REIF also provides up to $2 million to support the Renewables Innovation Hub. Other REIF activities include supporting industry bodies such as South East Region of Renewable Energy Excellence and Clean Energy Solutions Centre’s Asia Pacific node in expanding networks in the ACT. New household battery controls and solar radiation forecasting are receiving funding. In 2018–19, $1 million was allocated over three years to develop a commercially focused research and development capability for distributed energy resource (DER) applications. DERs are small-scale units or devices, such as home solar panels on rooftops and home batteries, which feed back into the electricity grid of commercial providers. This program provides funding for industry to develop and test smart controllers, metering devices and software to manage the supply of energy back into the grid. 342 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Next Generation Energy Storage Program – ‘Next Gen’ for business and households The $25 million Next Gen program supports the installation of around 5,000 batteries or 36 megawatts (MW) of storage in distributed systems across Canberra business and households. Around 1,200 systems have been supported under the program. A review has approved the policy and made recommendations on administration, communications, knowledge sharing, operational data accessibility, consultation, targeting specific participants, retaining the current incentive arrangements unless equity is a major consideration, considering increasing the battery size, and maximising opportunities for grants.51 The Next Gen program was recently recognised for its scale, innovation and success with the Renewable Energy Achievement Award at the Cities Power Partnership Awards. Research and Development: Hydrogen Research and Development – the next decade Evoenergy’s hydrogen test site. Source: OCSE. 51 Point Advisory, 2019, Final Report: Mid-term Review of the Next Generation Energy Storage Program, EPSDD, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/1412935/Final-report-Review-of-the- Next-Generation-Energy-Storage-Program.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 52 Canberra Institute of Technology (CIT), 4 December 2018, ‘Nation’s First Hydrogen Test Station at CIT Fyshwick’, found at Australia’s first 100 per cent hydrogen test site at the Canberra Institute of Technology, accessed 29 October 2019. 53 ACT Government, 2019, Whole of Government Communications and Engagement Plan, found at https://www.act.gov.au/__data/ assets/pdf_file/0020/1324640/2019-WhoG-Communications-and-Engagement-Plan.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. 54 EPSDD, 2013, Energy Efficiency Improvement Scheme, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/energy/ smarter-use-of-energy/energy-efficiency-improvement-scheme, accessed 29 October 2019. Policy supports the development of hydrogen production (electrolysis), vehicle refuelling and vehicle use, hydrogen blending in gas networks, and regulatory reform. The ACT is partnering with NEOEN, Hyundai and ActewAGL on a demonstration project with 20 Hyundai Nexo hydrogen passenger fleet vehicles and refuelling infrastructure. The refuelling station is anticipated to be completed by early 2020. Evoenergy has established Australia’s first 100% hydrogen test site at the Canberra Institute of Technology to test the potential for existing natural gas infrastructure to handle hydrogen and store energy.52 The ACT Government is working with ANU to build hydrogen and other zero-carbon energy opportunities. Community engagement and action – developing social capital through EEIS and Actsmart From 2017 to 2019, the Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability convened the Climate Change Ministerial Advisory Group (CCMAG). CCMAG consisted of community and industry representatives and provided valuable input and insights into development of the ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019–25 and Canberra’s Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City. An extensive consultation program and a Register of Ideas (900 contributions) have informed policy design. Community action will underpin the next stages of climate change policy and action.53 The community is engaged through the Energy Efficiency Improvement Scheme (EEIS) 54 and Actsmart. Actsmart – the sustainability policy program arm for home and business Actsmart programs support households, businesses, schools and the community to reduce emissions and increase energy efficiency. The Sustainable Home Advice program provides free home energy assessments, public workshops and phone and email advice to the general public. The Home Energy Efficiency Program (launched in 2016, it has now installed over 370 reverse cycle split systems) and Solar for Low Income Program (launched in 2017 installing over 500 solar systems) support vulnerable 343 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report households. Actsmart Household Programs have now provided support to over 22,500 residents. The Actsmart Business Energy and Water program provides advice and financial assistance for energy and water efficiency upgrades to ACT businesses, community groups and owners corporations with electricity bills up to $25,000 per annum and/or up to 20 employees. Technical assessments of premises lead to tailored outcomes, recommended upgrades and behaviour change opportunities. Rebates of 50% of costs are available for approved upgrades up to $5,000. Estimated lifetime energy savings from the upgrades installed since the program began are 53,730 MW hours. In February 2019 a Solar for Business trial was launched, offering free, independent, tailored advice and rebates up to $5,000 for the installation of rooftop solar systems to eligible businesses. In 2018–19, 81 businesses received advice and the installation of 28 solar systems began. The Actsmart Business Recycling program assists and accredits businesses to improve the way they deal with their waste, to redirect waste away from landfill and to strive to improve sustainability and reduce the Territory’s carbon footprint. 976 sites participate across the ACT.55 660 sites were accredited in 2018–19.56 Energy Efficiency Improvement Scheme (EEIS) The ACT EEIS policy is incorporated in legislation. It is secure and clear, embeds review, incorporates stakeholder feedback, leverages commercial interests, builds on success, and has a sustainable funding mechanism. The program began in 2013 and requires electricity retailers to achieve energy savings in households and small-to-medium enterprises: 500,000 tonnes of emissions reductions have been delivered, savings of $400 million savings on energy accounts have been recorded and 74,000 households have been engaged, as have stakeholders, in design, delivery and review and provision of feedback.57 55 This figure includes major shopping centres, fast food outlets, childcare centres, GIO Stadium, Manuka Oval, Australian Institute of Sport, Calvary Public Hospital, Calvary John James Hospital, the National Arboretum and the National Zoo and Aquarium. 56 Waste data from this program is found in the waste section of this chapter. 57 Point Advisory, 2018, Review of the Energy Efficiency Improvement Scheme, EPSDD, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/energy/smarter-use-of-energy/energy-efficiency-improvement-scheme/publications accessed 29 August 2019. 58 EPSDD, ACT Priority Household Target, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/energy/smarter-use-of-energy/energy_ efficiency_improvement_scheme_eeis/how-the-scheme-works/priority-household-target, accessed 29 October 2019. 59 Energy Efficiency (Cost of Living) Improvement (Priority Household Target) Determination 2019, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/di/2019-75/, accessed 29 October 2019. The ACT Priority Household Target, originally set at 20%,58 requires retailers to deliver energy savings to vulnerable households. In 2017 stakeholders were involved to increase the level of support to vulnerable households through extending eligibility criteria. In 2019, the Priority Household Target was extended to 2030 and the target was raised from 20% to 30%.59 Since 2015 residential insulation and business heating/cooling has been added as well as updated demand response and appliance activities. Rigorous monitoring and evaluation is locked in to provide feedback loops and continuous improvement. In 2018 an independent review confirmed the policy. Since 2013 five post-implementation and customer satisfaction surveys have been administered to both households and businesses. Ongoing audit and compliance processes ensure quality and safety of installations under the scheme. In 2018 a Public Housing Partnership was developed in collaboration with Housing ACT and ActewAGL to improve energy efficiency; 2,200 public houses will benefit from efficient heaters, hot water units and Actsmart energy audits and education sessions. Community Zero Emissions Grants Program – finding funds for change The ACT’s transition to net zero emissions by 2045 is supported by a community grants program. From 2018 to 2021, the program will expend $550,000. Reviews are conducted to ensure ACT Government sustainability priorities are given a higher weighting. In 2019, round three of the program offered $163,000, prioritising transport and the transition from gas. Community Gardens Grants Program – growing our own The Community Gardens Grants program, now in the fifth round of delivery, supports the development and expansion of community gardens across Canberra. In 2019, $50,000 was allocated across 11 projects. 344 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report WASTE Overview 60 Ellen MacArthur Foundation Podcast, 2019, ‘What is the Circular Economy?’, found at https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/ circular-economy/what-is-the-circular-economy, accessed 21 November 2019 61 Prime Minister of Australia, 13 August 2019, Media Release ‘A Greener Recycling Industry’, found at https://www.pm.gov.au/media/greener-recycling-industry accessed 21 November 2019. 62 Australian federal, state and local governments, 2018, National Waste Policy 2018. This policy replaced the National Waste Policy of 2009, and is found at https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/d523f4e9-d958-466b-9fd1-3b7d6283f006/ files/national-waste-policy-2018.pdf, accessed on 21 November 2019. 63 Eighth Meeting of Environment Ministers, 7 December 2018, Agreed Statement, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/pages/4f59b654-53aa-43df-b9d1-b21f9caa500c/files/mem8-agreed-statement.pdf; ACT NoWaste represents the ACT Government on the National Waste Policy Government Working Group. 64 ACT Government, 2003, State of the Environment Report 2003, found at https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/soe_about-the-report/ soe_archive/2003actreport/indicators03/solidwaste03, accessed 21 November 2019. 65 City Services Canberra and City Services Directorate, 2019, Phasing out Single Use Plastics, Discussion Paper, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/7815/5531/2282/FINAL_-_Phasing_out_ single-use_plastics_discussion_paper.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. Globally, nationally and regionally, waste policy is undergoing reform. Consumption, production, and waste patterns are increasingly unsustainable. The community is becoming more engaged and understanding the concept of waste as a resource. The ecological–sociological implications of waste-to-energy, the heightened global angst about plastic pollution and the climate change crisis, and the increasing interest of government and business in transitioning to a circular economy, are complex challenges that urgently need to be addressed.60 The external shock of China refusing to accept low-grade recyclable waste in 2018 resulted in flow-on consequences over which sub-national jurisdictions have little control. In 2018 the Council of Australian Governments announced a ban on the export of waste plastic, paper, glass and tyres. Nationally, the intention is to generate high-value recycled commodities and demand.61 Australia’s National Waste Policy was released in December 2018 and promotes a circular economy.62 The National Waste Policy Action Plan is in development, in collaboration with states and territories.63 The ACT Government is represented at national waste forums by No Waste. In 1995 the ACT was the first jurisdiction to set an ambitious zero-waste policy.64 An increase in resource recovery was achieved, from 30% in 1995 to around 60% in the mid–2000s. In 2018 the ACT continues to lead, exploring a ban on all single use plastics and in its policy engagement with the community and businesses.65 Waste recycling sorter. Source: OCSE. 345 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy context 66 EPSDD, 2011, ACT Waste Management Strategy 2011–2025, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act. gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/576916/ACT-Waste-Strategy-Policy_access.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 67 Transport Canberra and City Service (TCCS), Annual Reports, found at https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/about-us/annual_report, accessed 18 November 2019. 68 Department of the Environment and Energy, 2018, National Waste Report 2018, found at https://www.environment.gov.au/ protection/waste-resource-recovery/national-waste-reports/national-waste-report-2018, accessed 18 November 2019. 69 Keep Australia Beautiful National Association, 2018, National Report 2017–2018 National Litter Index, found at http://kab.org.au/ wp-content/uploads/2019/03/2019_NLI17_18_EPORT.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 70 ACT NoWaste, 2018, ACT Waste Feasibility Study Roadmap and Recommendations, TCCS, Canberra, found at https://www.tccs.act. gov.au/recycling-and-waste/waste-strategies/feasibility-study accessed 21 November 2019; also see https://s3.ap-southeast-2. amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/2715/2566/4187/WFS_roadmap.pdf, accessed 21 November 2019. 71 Found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2016-51, accessed 18 November 2019. 72 Replaced the Waste Minimisation Act 2001 and Waste Minimisation Regulation 2001. ACT Waste Management Strategy 2011–2025 The ACT Waste Management Strategy 2011–202566 is the key waste policy, promoting: • less waste generated • full resource recovery • a clean environment, and • a carbon neutral waste sector. TCCS annual reports provide progress reports67 and the ACT also contributes to the National Waste Report68 and National Litter Index.69 ACT Waste Feasibility Study70 The ACT Waste Feasibility Study Roadmap and Recommendations includes recommending a major review of the ACT Waste Management Strategy for 2011–2025. This review is timely given global and local pressures, tensions and opportunities, and the need to produce a relevant action plan with effective goals and reporting. Like many other jurisdictions the ACT is beginning to explore the possibilities of the circular economy. Legislative interventions The Waste Management and Resource Recovery Act 2016 71 and the Waste Management and Resource Recovery Regulation 2017 commenced on 1 July 2017.72 The new legislation and waste activity management system works to track data on the movement of licenced waste facilities and transporters. Development of a new mobile application has started for waste activity reporting by registered waste transporters. 346 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report OCSE COMMENTARY UNFANTASTIC PLASTIC – REVIEW OF THE ACT PLASTIC SHOPPING BAG BAN, SEPTEMBER 2018 BY1132 TONNES FROM 2011 – 2018 THE ACT PLASTIC BAG BAN HAS REDUCED OUR PLASTIC BAG USE: 199 TONNES IN 2017–18 ALONE AROUND 55 MILLION PLASTIC BAGS Infographic created by OCSE. Source: OCSE report, Unfantastic Plastic. Under Ministerial direction, the Commissioner’s office investigated in 2018 the efficacy of the ACT plastic bag ban legislation. The Unfantastic Plastic investigation reported the success of the ACT’s efforts, highlighted alarming indications of plastic pollution globally, and the need to act urgently. Recommendations included: • Introducing a mandatory plastic bag disclosure regime – not agreed to by the Government. • Introducing minimum plastic shopping bag prices – not agreed to by the Government. • Improve governance and regulation – accepted by the Government. • Further research into organics and degradable plastics – accepted by the Government. Subsequently, in August 2018, responsibility for the plastic bag ban legislation moved to the Minister for City Services, Chris Steel MLA. In February 2019 Minister Steel announced the ACT Government’s intention to introduce legislation to ban all single-use plastics. This change in policy replaces the need for recommendations 1 and 2. The Unfantastic Plastic report highlighted an endemic lack of data in the waste industry and the failure to provide evidence-based information to policy makers and the community alike. 347 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES 06 Government responses to environmental issues in the ACT 347.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy development 73 The survey can be found at https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/single-use-plastics, accessed 21 November 2019. 74 TCCS , 2018, Information Paper: Waste-to-Energy (WtE) in the ACT, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https:// s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/5815/3861/5790/Waste-to-energy_information_paper_ final.pdf, accessed on 21 November 2019. 75 PWC, 2017, Energy from Waste in Australia. Delivering Projects in an Emerging Sector, found at https://www.pwc.com.au/ publications/pdf/energy-from-waste-april-2017.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 76 Vorrath, S., 18 October 2018, ‘“Australian-First” Big Waste-to-Energy Plant Reaches Financial Close in W.A.’, Renew Economy, found at https://reneweconomy.com.au/australian-first-big-waste-to-energy-plant-reaches-financial-close-in-w-a-59064/, accessed 18 November 2019. 77 Other jurisdictions have been working with landfill levies (for instance, Victoria, see https://www.epa.vic.gov.au/ your-environment/waste/landfills, accessed 21 November 2019). The matter has also been looked into in the Australian Parliament; see Senate Standing Committees on Environment and Communications, 2018, Report into Waste and Recycling Industry in Australia, Chapter 4, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_ Business/Committees/Senate/Environment_and_Communications/WasteandRecycling/Report/c04, accessed 21 November 2019. 78 Senate Standing Committees on Environment and Communications, 2018, Report into Waste and Recycling Industry in Australia, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, found at https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/ Environment_and_Communications/WasteandRecycling/Report/c04, accessed 18 November 2019. 79 EPSDD, 2011, ACT Waste Management Strategy 2011–2025, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act. gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/576916/ACT-Waste-Strategy-Policy_access.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. Phasing out single-use plastics: policy leadership and business engagement The ACT has had success with its plastic shopping bag ban and is engaging with the community, business and industry on the phase-out and potential ban of single-use plastics (announced in February 2019). In line with best practice, community consultation on the phasing out of single-use plastics was undertaken in 2019 with over 2,500 people completing the survey.73 Waste to energy: unresolved complexity During 2018–19, the ACT conducted extensive community and industry consultation to seek views on waste-to-energy in the ACT to inform policy development on this contentious question. OCSE provided a submission noting the need to focus efforts on reducing resource use, paramount to any waste-to-energy options. It is not clear yet whether shifts in industry and consumer practice may remove the need for this waste option. Clear policy on waste to energy is necessary to provide certainty to the community and industry.74 Several development processes for large-scale, privately operated waste management facilities in the ACT have been mooted over time. Big corporations like Veolia, Phoenix and Cleanaway are interested in the policy outcomes. In 2017 PWC briefed clients about the issue.75 Renew Economy has reported on Western Australian developments which have been supported by the WA Environmental Protection Authority, Australian Renewable Energy Agency, and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation76 The ACT’s Interim Waste Levy: price signals to impact waste In 2019 an ‘interim’ waste levy was introduced in the ACT increasing gate fees for commercial waste at landfill facilities, with the intention of promoting resource recovery and addressing cross-border impacts.77 The ACT interim levy is intended to overcome inconsistencies and support the harmonisation of levies agreed at the Meeting of Environment Ministers in December 2018. This interim model will inform the final outcome. The ACT Government is considering the development of a broad-based waste levy to increase recovery rates and address cross-border waste impacts through price signals. The Senate Environment and Communications Committee, which considered the waste crisis in 2018, provided a number of recommendations about matters such as price signals and harmonisation.78 Practical applications of policy in the waste sector – targets, recovery, recycling, evaluation, data, organics, bulky waste. The ACT Waste Management Strategy 2011–2025 has established targets for reducing waste, full resource recovery, a carbon neutral waste sector, and a clean environment.
79 The ACT continues to have one of the highest resource recovery rates in Australia despite population growth, high income and consumption levels, shorter lifecycles of goods (particularly for electronics), and an apparent preference in society for single-use items and packaging. 348 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The ACT Material Recovery Facility (MRF) provides co-mingled recycling services to the ACT region. Stockpiling onsite is a result of global issues. In 2017 $8 million was invested in technological improvements to increase resource recovery. Upgrades to improve business efficiency, safety, security and enhance separation to reduce contamination in marketable, finished products are scheduled.80 The ACT has evaluated its progress against achieving full resource recovery via the Waste Feasibility Study Roadmap and Recommendations. Government has taken action in response to the recommendations, including engaging in extensive community consultation on a waste-to-energy policy for the ACT, and moving towards a full organics collection service. A garden organics kerbside collection service for all residents was instituted ahead of schedule in April 2019. A pilot food waste reduction campaign and the expansion of this collection service to include food organics is in train. In September 2019, one free annual household bulky waste collection was announced, to be rolled out across the ACT from July 2020. National leadership has been shown on waste management and resource recovery data collection and analytics at the local level. Strengthened legislation has created a quarterly reporting obligation for waste management and resource recovery facilities and transporters, and an improved reporting application is in the advanced stages of development. The ACT contributes to the National Litter Index and National Waste Report. Regional collaboration with NSW was fostered in 2019 when the Recycle Right campaign was launched through the Canberra Region Joint Organisation to reduce yellow bin contamination at the ACT MRF. Collaboration with NSW on the ACT’s Container Deposit Scheme (2018 CDS) has been highly successful. Over 26 million containers were recycled in the first 12 months.81 80 Particularly relevant since the introduction of the Container Deposit Scheme in Canberra. See FAQs found at https://actcds.com. au/faqs/, accessed 18 November 2019. 81 Commentary on this achievement is found at https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/open_government/inform/act_government_ media_releases/chris-steel-mla-media-releases/2019/new-container-deposit-scheme-return-points-announced,- with-more-on-the-way accessed on 2 December 2019. Container Deposit Scheme in operation at Floriade. Source: https://www.facebook.com/pg/ACTCDS/photos/ 349 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report CASE STUDY CONTAINER DEPOSIT SCHEME (CDS) ASPHALT 82 Research on the use of recycled waste is available: Zakariah, N. et al, 2018, The Use of Mixed Waste Recycled Plastic and Glass as an Aggregate Replacement in Asphalt Mixtures, Jurnal Teknologi, 80: 79–88, found at https://www.researchgate.net/ publication/321747994_The_Use_of_Mixed_Waste_Recycled_Plastic_and_Glass_as_an_Aggregate_Replacement_in_Asphalt_ Mixtures accessed 18 November 2019; US Federal Highway Administration Research and Technology, 2016, ‘User Guidelines for Waste and Byproduct Materials in Pavement Construction’, found at https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/ infrastructure/pavements/97148/068.cfm, accessed 18 November 2019; Hume City Council, 29 May 2018, ‘Road Built With Plastic Bags and Glass in Australian-first’, found at https://www.hume.vic.gov.au/About_Us_Contact_Details/Your_Council/ Media_Publications_amp_Forms/Media_Releases/Media_Releases_2018/Road_built_with_plastic_bags_and_glass_in_ Australian-first, accessed 18 November 2019. 83 ACT Government CDS Scheme, 7 March 2019, ‘Canberra to Trial Roads Made of Recycled Plastic and Glass’, found at https:// actcds.com.au/act_news/canberra-to-trial-roads-made-of-recycled-plastic-and-glass/, accessed 18 November 2019 84 Downer and the City of Hume in Victoria provide a case study, 29 May 2018, ‘Road Built With Plastic Bags and Glass in Australian-first’, found at https://www.environment.gov.au/about-us/partnerships/case-studies/australia-first-road-built-soft- plastics, accessed 18 November 2019. 85 Found at http://www.thegreenshed.net.au/, accessed 18 November 2019. 86 The Green Shed website, as at 9 August 2019, found at http://www.thegreenshed.net.au/ An example of research, science, policy development and implementation aligning to generate environmentally sustainable outcomes – including the potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions – is the trial of CDS glass for Gungahlin roads. Glass containers from CDS express drop-off points are being imploded at the ACT MRF to make glass sand to use in asphalt, as it is considered to be stronger and more resistant to heavy traffic deterioration than traditional surfaces.82 Each tonne of asphalt comprises 300 glass bottles, 800 plastic bags, 18 printer cartridges and 250 kilograms of recycled asphalt.83 The ACT joins other jurisdictions in this innovation.84 Recycling Discovery Hub, Recyclopaedia, and the Green Shed, In 2017 the Recycling Discovery Hub was upgraded to cater for larger school and community groups, including some from NSW. Industry and government recognise it as a benchmark facility (there were 5,440 visitors in 2018–19). In 2018–19, the Recyclopaedia webpage, an important channel for communication, was refreshed, informing more than 80,000 unique visitors each year. The Green Shed is a reuse service at Mitchell and Mugga Lane Resource Centres. 85 It accepts unwanted goods to sell on to the public and it runs two privately operated shop fronts in Canberra. Green Shed outcomes include: • 60 million kilograms of ‘waste’ diverted from landfill • 64 million items, including 66,000 bikes, salvaged and sold • 3 million clothing items recycled • 73 jobs created, and • $800,000 raised for charity. 86 Actsmart waste programs: business and the public – the program arm of policy The Actsmart Business Recycling program assists and accredits businesses to improve the way they deal with their waste, to redirect waste away from landfill and to strive to improve sustainability and reduce the Territory’s carbon footprint. The 976 ACT sites participating in these programs include major shopping centres, fast food outlets, childcare centres, GIO Stadium, Manuka Oval, Australian Institute of Sport, Calvary Public Hospital, Calvary John James Hospital, National Arboretum and National Zoo and Aquarium. In 2018 the Straws Suck campaign engaged 77 businesses in reducing plastic waste.
 In 2018–19, the 660 accredited sites recycled approximately 22,728 cubic metres of mixed recyclables, representing 1,833 tCO2 -e (carbon dioxide equivalent) avoided, 24,281 cubic metres of paper and cardboard, representing 6,070 tCO2 -e avoided, and 2,375 cubic metres of organic material, which is equivalent to 1,303 tCO2 -e. Other participating businesses have achieved waste-to-landfill reductions not captured in these statistics. Over-servicing has been avoided. Regional businesses whose waste is diverted to ACT landfills 350 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report are serviced through a cross-border agreement with Queanbeyan–Palerang Regional Council. The Actsmart Public Event program, available to any community event, helps organisers implement recycling, energy, water and transport efficiencies. In 2018–19, 278 events included Floriade, the National Multicultural Festival, ActewAGL Royal Canberra Show, National Folk Festival, Summernats 32, sporting events. Waste diverted included 92,651 kilograms of mixed recycling (equivalent to 118 tCO2 -e avoided) and 18,459 kilograms of organic waste (equivalent to 29 tCO2 -e). More than 1.5 million patrons have been exposed to recycling at these events. Odour, environmental impact statements, and asbestos: addressing hazards Mugga Lane odour management Methane produced at Mugga Lane is captured, reducing emissions and generating energy. New gas capture infrastructure will be installed under a new contract. The new agreement at Mugga Lane will improve environmental protection by reducing escaped gas and the risk of fire and odour at the landfill. An independent odour-monitoring and assessment consultant is engaged by the ACT Government to report on potential odour issues at the Mugga Lane landfill. Construction continues to increase capacity at Mugga Lane landfill, which has been identified as the territory’s landfill until approximately 2050. Mugga 2 quarry site, with an operational life of 20–30 years, will begin operations in 2020 accepting inert demolition waste. 87 ACT Auditor-General, 2016, Report on the Management of the Financial Arrangements for the Delivery of the Loose-fill Asbestos (Mr Fluffy) Insulation Eradication Scheme, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.audit.act.gov.au/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0012/1179939/Report-No-4-of-2016-The-management-of-the-financial-arrangements-for-the-delivery-of-the-Loose-fill -Asbestos-Mr-Fluffy-Insulation-Eradication-Scheme.pdf, accessed 18 November 2019. 88 More information can be found at http://www.asbestostaskforce.act.gov.au/, accessed on 18 November 2019. Environmental impact statements and development applications relevant to waste TCCS supports the ACT Planning and Land Authority within EPSDD as a mandatory referral agency for Environmental Impact Statements (EISs), EIS scoping documents and Development Applications (DAs). ACT NoWaste provides input on TCCS comment on selected DAs and EISs relating to mixed/multi-unit developments and waste facilities to ensure the objectives of regulations, policies and government waste strategies are considered as part of these processes. Community members are also able to provide submissions to the EIS process, and these are publicly displayed. Asbestos and other construction events Construction events, such as the demolition of Mr Fluffy houses and Currong apartments, were dealt with appropriately. Asbestos-contaminated waste was landfilled in a licenced facility within safety requirements. The ability to handle unforeseen problematic waste streams continues to be an ACT strength. The ACT Audit Office provided a report on the removal process in 2016.87 The Asbestos Response Taskforce has reported, provided a register, established a legacy project and engaged the community in its operations.88 351 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report AIR Overview Air environment protection policy aims to meet national ambient air quality standards and to minimise risk to the local community from air pollution. The ACT Government is a signatory to the National Clean Air Agreement which seeks to manage air quality, deliver better air quality information, improve emissions and efficiency standards for new wood heaters and non-road spark ignition engines, and strengthen reporting standards for particulate matter pollution through the National Environment Protection (Ambient Air Quality) Measure (AAQ NEPM). Policy context Poor air quality in Canberra November 2019. Source: https://the-riotact.com/poor-air-quality-and-visibility- is-here-to-stay-over-the-weekend/339955 The Environment Protection Act 1997 (ACT) (EP Act 1997) serves to protect and improve air quality. Environment Protection Regulation 2005 addresses emissions to air and provides the framework for regulation of activities. The Health Act 1993 (ACT) does not legislate on air quality. The ACT Environment Protection Authority (EPA) enforces the AAQ NEPM legislation and relevant regulations. Recent and pending changes to the AAQ NEPM result in the ACT being unable to meet the current and proposed measure in full. Options to address this are being investigated. Policy developments EPA: its role and responsibilities – years of endeavour In 2018, EPSDD commenced a review of air environment protection policy (EP Act 1997), and standards and criteria for industrial emissions, including odour. The ACT Government has developed the Separation Distance Guidelines for Air Emissions 2018. Extensive internal and external consultations took place. Guidelines provide clarity and certainty for assessing development proposals and assist strategic planning for the siting of potentially incompatible land uses. The ACT Wood Heater Replacement Program commenced in 2004. A financial incentive is offered to replace wood heaters with energy efficient electric alternatives: 1,179 wood heaters have been removed between 2004 and 2019. An education program provides advice to air conditioning and wood heater retailers of appliances under the EP Act 1997 and Environment Protection Regulation 2005. In 2016, amendments were made to the EP Act 1997 and Environment Protection Regulation 2005 to introduce stricter Australian Standards for emissions and efficiency for domestic wood heaters. In September 2019, these standards were again tightened in accordance with the Australian Standards. Territory Plan variations can be used to provide for air quality improvements in relation to emissions from wood heaters. Structure or concept plans can be used to give statutory effect. Restrictions on the installation of wood heaters are already in place in the Molonglo Valley (excluding Wright), east O’Malley and Dunlop. Firewood merchants are regulated under the Environment Protection Regulation 2005, and the ACT Burn Right Tonight community education campaign continues. Health Directorate: its role and responsibilities, a growing challenge ACT Health is seeking to establish a network of particulate sensors to monitor wood smoke in areas of Canberra not covered by the current monitoring network. The ACT Health Directorate’s Air Quality Index website provides real-time assessments of air pollution in the ACT. The index shows levels of pollutants, a colour-coded description of what the levels mean, and the potential health risks associated with the index levels. 352 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report LAND 89 The ACT Government’s 2017 fact sheet on the Territory Plan is found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/hdp.au.prod. app.act-yoursay.files/4715/6402/4649/Fact_Sheet_-_Territory_Plan_Overview_A16314423.pdf 90 The current Territory Plan is comprised of 43 strategic principles and approximately 180 codes, 160 objectives, 1,400 rules and 1,200 criteria. It is based on the Development Assessment Forum (DAF) model, a national model which now needs revisiting to support the delivery of better outcomes. 91 The zone, precinct and overlay requirements are detailed in the volumes of the Territory Plan. Overview Land use planning has implications for biodiversity. In the ACT offsets have been instituted to make provision for development (see the biodiversity section below). To protect the environment and lessen the impact of the growth of the city of Canberra, planning legislation, regulation, strategies and plans need to consider biodiversity, and the impacts of climate change. Policy context Planning and Development Act 2007 The Planning and Development Act 2007 (ACT) established the Planning and Land Authority (PLA) as the ACT authority which prepares and administers the Territory Plan, including continually reviewing and proposing amendments. The PLA is administered by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. The Territory Plan The Territory Plan (TP) is a written statement and a map, prepared and administered by the planning authority (established as a function of the operation of the Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988 (Cwlth).89 The TP is complex and guides governance, strategic directions, zones (including objectives and development tables and zone or centre development codes), precinct codes, general codes, overlays, definitions, structure plans, concept plans and development codes for future urban areas.90 The TP Map graphically represents the applicable land use zones under the categories of residential, commercial, industrial, community facility, urban parks and recreation, transport and services and non-urban; precincts; and overlays.91 Strategic Assessments – Molonglo, Gungahlin, West Belconnen and Eastern Broadacre Development of the suburb of Whitlam, Molonglo Valley. Source: https://matthewsherrenphotography.com/ Strategic Assessments are the mechanism by which the Commonwealth and the ACT streamline development processes, while at the same time establishing protocols for the protection of Matters of Environmental Significance (MNES) pursuant to the Commonwealth’s Environment and Biodiversity Protection Act 1999 (see the Biodiversity section below). 353 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy development 92 EPSDD, 2018, ACT Planning Strategy 2018, ACT Government, Canberra: 7, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/ hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/3615/4474/5124/ACT_Planning_Strategy_2018.pdf accessed on 2 December 2019. 93 EPSDD, 2018, ACT Planning Strategy 2018, ACT Government, Canberra:38–40, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws. com/hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/3615/4474/5124/ACT_Planning_Strategy_2018.pdf accessed on 2 December 2019. 94 EPSDD, 2018, ACT Planning Strategy 2018, ACT Government, Canberra: 69, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/ hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/3615/4474/5124/ACT_Planning_Strategy_2018.pdf 95 The Planning and Development Act 2007 requires the planning and land authority to consider at least once every five years whether the Territory Plan should be reviewed. 96 Your say link found at https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/act-planning-review/background, accessed 29 October 2019. 97 Found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2007-24/, accessed 29 October 2019. 98 EPSDD Planning, Territory Plan webpage, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools_resources/plans-registers/plans/ territory_plan, accessed 29 October 2019. 99 EPSDD, 2018, ‘Variation to the Territory Plan 356’, found at https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0011/1257824/Approval-of-Variation-No-356-to-the-Territory-Plan-Amendments-to-the-West-Belconnen-Concept-Pl an-for-Ginninderry-Stage-1-Development,-dated-18-September-2018,-including-associated-documents.pdf, accessed 21 November 2019. 100 EPSDD, 2019,’Draft Variation to the Territory Plan 354’, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0004/1415920/DV354-Water-Sensitive-Urban-Design-recommended-to-the-Minister.pdf, accessed 21 November 2019 101 Found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/ni/2017-501 accessed on 21 November 2019. 102 ACT Government media release, 22 July 2016, ‘Green Light for Residential Development in West Belconnen’, found at https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/open_government/inform/act_government_media_releases/gentleman/2016/green-light-for- residential-development-in-west-belconnen, accessed 18 November 2019. ACT Planning Strategy 2018 The ACT Planning Strategy 2018 replaces the 2012 strategy and is the key strategic document guiding growth and change.92 The ACT Government invited views about this refresh of the planning strategy including from the Young Planners Association and through interactive live streaming. The new strategy promotes a compact city focused on key centres and transport corridors, identifies urban intensification centres, and promotes walkability and the efficient use of infrastructure. It has been developed to align with transport, housing and climate change strategies. The aspiration for urban infill has increased to 70% from 50% in 2012.93 Urban intensification areas have been marginally expanded. The Ginninderry development is provided with a more specific boundary. The western edge investigation area has been contracted: it no longer crosses the Murrumbidgee River. Areas described as ‘centres’ are similar to those outlined in 2012 and the Canberra Airport and suburbs of Casey and Jamieson are identified as ‘employment clusters’. Urban heat island (UHI) interventions, and green and blue infrastructure, are promoted to respond to climate change, improve air, soil and water quality, and increase public amenity. Residential development provisions will be updated to mitigate the loss of tree canopy cover and permeable surfaces as a result of urban intensification.94 The Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City 2019 (launched outside this reporting period) builds on this commitment. Territory Plan Review After the refresh of the Planning Strategy, a major planning review commenced in March 2019 and will continue into 2020.95 Across 2018 a range of consultations, including about housing choices, has taken place. 96 A key objective is to establish a concise, clear, unambiguous, outcomes-focused statutory plan. A strategic environmental assessment will evaluate impacts of proposed TP changes (section 100, Planning and Development Act 2007).
97 Territory Plan amendments to address climate change, biodiversity and sustainability issues98 Territory Plan draft variations in this reporting period include: • V356 gas utility services in West Belconnen, making gas utility service optional not mandatory (2018)99 • V354 Water Sensitive Design Code revision, providing for a general code unless site specific provisions apply (2019)100 • V348 active living principles (2017)101 • V351 West Belconnen Urban development rezoning land immediately west of the suburbs of Holt and Macgregor, providing for 6,500 residences and mixed-use premises with access to a 360-hectare nature reserve on the Murrumbidgee River (2016).102 354 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Master Plan Program Since 2015 master plans for Mawson (2015), Woden (2015), Belconnen (2016), Calwell (2016), Tharwa (2018), Curtin (2018),103 Gungahlin Refresh (2018) and Kippax (2019) have been released. By focusing urban intensification in existing town centres, group centres and transit corridors, these plans support compact, efficient and sustainable development. Territory Plan Precinct Codes provide statutory effect. Community consultation has been encouraged.104 Land Release Program (2018–2022 Indicative Land Release Program) ‘Underlying demand’ drives the release of land in the ACT. The Australian Bureau of Statistics anticipates population growth of 7,200 people per year and housing demand is assessed at 3,000 per year to 2024. Oversupply – at 4,000 over the next four years – is routinely adopted to promote housing ‘affordability’. 103 One example, the Curtin Group Centre Master Plan, can be found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools-resources/ plans-registers/plans/master-plans/curtin_group_centre_master_plan, accessed 31 October 2019. 104 For example, for the Kippax developments, see EPSDD, 2017, Kippax Group Centre Master Panel: Community Panel Outcomes Report, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/1138989/Kippax- Group-Centre-Master-Plan-Community-Panel-Community-Panel-Outcomes-Report-access.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019; and EPSDD Planning, Kippax Group Centre Master Plan webpage, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools-resources/ plans-registers/plans/master-plans/kippax, accessed 31 October 2019. 105 NCA and ACT Government, 2018, City and Gateway Draft Urban Design Framework, EPSDD, Canberra, found at https://www. planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1296986/CITY-AND-GATEWAY-Urban-Design-Framework.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. 106 ACT Government, 2017, Molonglo Valley Stage 3, Interim Limited Area Planning and Design Framework, found at https://www. yoursay.act.gov.au/city-and-gateway-draft-urban-design-framework, accessed 31 October 2019. City and Gateway Urban Design Framework 2018105 The National Capital Authority (NCA ) and ACT Government’s City and Gateway Draft Urban Design Framework sets principles for development and growth in the city centre and along Northbourne Avenue and Federal Highway. Targets for green and blue infrastructure have been established. The community was consulted.106 Planning for Ginninderry. Source: OCSE. 355 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Biodiversity and Strategic Assessments107 107 This issue is discussed in more detail in the Biodiversity section below. 108 Relevant government publications: ACT Government, 2017, Molonglo Valley Stage 3, Interim Limited Area Planning and Design Framework, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1348005/Molonglo-Planning-and-Design- Framework-Stage3-ACCESS.pdf accessed 2 December 2019 ; and ACT Government, 2109, Molonglo Valley Stage 3 Planning and Design Framework, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1348005/Molonglo-Planning-and- Design-Framework-Stage3-ACCESS.pdf, accessed 30 October 2019 and, previously, https://www.planning.act.gov.au/topics/- significant_projects/planning_studies/-molonglo_valley_stage_2_planning_project accessed on 30 October 2019. 109 EPSDD Planning, 2017, Molonglo Valley Stage 3 Urban Development EIS exemption application, found at https://www.planning. act.gov.au/development_applications/da_assessment/environmental_assessment/exemption_from_requiring_an_eis_s211/ molonglo-valley-stage-3-urban-development, accessed 30 October 2019; EPSDD, 2017, Molonglo Stage 3 – Urban Development and Infrastructure, Application for EIS Exemption Consideration Report, found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/ assets/pdf_file/0013/1202440/Molonglo-Stage-3-EIS-Exemption-Report.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019; ACT Government, 2018, Exemption Instrument, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/ni/2018-260, accessed 29 October 2019. 110 ACT Government, 2019, Nature Conservation (Molonglo River Reserve) Reserve Management Plan 2019, found at https://www. legislation.act.gov.au/di/2019-192/. Details of information provided for community consultation are found at https://www. yoursay.act.gov.au/act-parks/molonglo-river-reserve 111 ACT Government, 2019, Nature Conservation (Molonglo River Reserve) Reserve Management Plan 2019, found at https://www. legislation.act.gov.au/di/2019-192/, accessed 20 November 2019. 112 Found at https://www.planning.act.gov.au/planning-our-city/planning-studies/eastern_broadacre_planning_project/act_ eastern_broadacre_final_report accessed 2 December 2019. Molonglo Valley Stage 3 Planning and Design Framework and the Molonglo River Reserve Molonglo Valley Stage 3 Planning and Design Framework (PDF)108 refines the Territory Plan’s Molonglo Valley Structure Plan. Stage 3 is projected to accommodate 10,000–12,000 dwellings at varying densities and for mixed use. The PDF – a requirement of the 2011 Molonglo Valley Plan for the protection of MNES – requires the preparation of indicative design plans before starting subdivision planning. The PDF includes requirements for the Kama Nature Reserve buffer zone, specified when the Minister granted an environmental impact statement (EIS) exemption.109 The Molonglo River Reserve110 follows the Molonglo River from Scrivener Dam to the Murrumbidgee River Corridor Reserve and has high conservation and recreation value. It is comprised of the Kama Nature Reserve, Lower Molonglo River Corridor Nature Reserve, and Molonglo River Special Purpose Reserve. The 2019 Molonglo River Reserve Management Plan guides biodiversity and other usages.111 Eastern Broadacre – Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 Strategic Assessment (in process) The ACT Planning Strategy 2018 identifies the need to investigate establishing new employment areas including in the Eastern Broadacre.112 Proximity to existing industrial estates and the arterial and highway road network were considerations. MNES have been identified and an Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cwlth, EPBC Act) Strategic Assessment is being undertaken to develop a biodiversity commitment strategy. Public consultation on the draft will commence in 2020. A supplementary report will then be lodged with the Commonwealth for determination after which the Territory Plan will be varied. An independent audit of commitments will be required. 356 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report BIODIVERSITY Overview Biodiversity policy is complex and plays out in human settlement and planning policy, and is linked inextricably to water, climate change and other policy areas. Policy instruments range across portfolios and across programs and projects. Biodiversity policy is transparent, evidence-based, and accountable. Monitoring and evaluation is formalised, strategies and plans and reviews and revision are routine. Adaptive management is adopted across the portfolio. Organisational structures are stable and regional collaboration is institutionalised as is appropriate. COMPLEXITY IN ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY – BIOSECURITY IN THE ACT The Biosecurity Strategy 2016 provides a classic example of the complexity of managing biodiversity challenges. Biosecurity is a national and sub-national concern. It involves fauna, flora and aquatic species, is potentially the subject of urgent interventions, and involves legal, policy, operational and personnel collaborations. Assessing management effectiveness can be challenging because of the potential for unexpected human activities. The legal landscape is complex and critically important. At the Commonwealth level biosecurity is governed by the Biosecurity Act 2015 and the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. At the territory level, the ACT’s biosecurity concerns are governed by the Plant Diseases Act 2002, Pest Plant and Animals Act 2005, Animal Diseases Act 2005 and Nature Conservation Act 2014, Emergencies Act 2004, Fisheries Act 2000 (ACT), ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy 2012–2022, ACT Weeds Strategy 2009–2019 and ACT Biosecurity Emergency Plan. Across the border, NSW has its own numerous environmental legislation, regulation and strategy, some of which have relevance for the ACT. 357 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy context Nature Conservation Act 2014 The Nature Conservation Act 2014 (ACT) is the overarching framework and creates the Conservator of Flora and Fauna, and the Scientific Committee. ACT environmental organisational management structure Minister for the Environment Responsible for the Act Land management ACT Parks & Conservation Service City Services Landholders Partnerships Government Traditional Custodians Community Groups Institutions Research & monitoring ACT Government Universities Conservation organisations Citizen science Canberra community Park users Schools Urban residents Rural landholders ACT Nature Conservation Act 2014 Conservator Management of ACT national parks and reserves, rural and urban areas, and native plants and animals ACT Nature Conservation Strategy ACT Scientific Committee Independent Experts, appointed by the Minister for advice on nature conservation, under the Act Supported by Infographic created by OCSE, information sourced from EPSDD. Conservator of Flora and Fauna 113 Management of urban trees is discussed in the chapter on the urban forest. The Tree Protection Act 2005 (ACT) is found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2005-51 114 EPSDD, 2017, Conservator Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna in the ACT, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/1138912/Conservator-guidelines-for-the-transloca tion-of-native-flora-and-fauna-in-the-ACT.pdf The Conservator’s responsibilities include operationalising and reviewing the Nature Conservation Strategy for effectiveness of landscape scale approaches across tenures, habitat restoration, landscape connectivity, threats to biodiversity, the impacts of climate change, and biodiversity research and monitoring programs. Public consultation and reporting are required. The Conservator maintains responsibility for urban trees.113 In 2017, the Conservator developed Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna.114 Action plans, species conservation plans and controlled native species plans, and licencing are also in the Conservator’s remit. 358 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program and Conservation Effectiveness Management Program 115 More information on the ACT Scientific Committee can be found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/advisory-bodies/ act-scientific-committee 116 The ACT Scientific Committee replaced the ACT Flora and Fauna Committee. Conservation Advices total 34 and they can be searched for on the Department of the Environment and Energy Species Profile and Threats Database webpage, found at http://www.environment.gov.au/cgi-bin/sprat/public/conservationadvice.pl. 117 Environment and Planning Directorate, 2013, ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23, Implementation Plan 1 (2013–2018), ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/576177/NCS-Implem entation-Plan-1-2013-2018.pdf; EPSDD, 2019, ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23, Implementation Plan 2 (2019-23), ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/1428363/ACT-Nature-Cons ervation-Strategy-Implementation-Plan-2-201923.pdf The Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program (BRAMP), required under the Nature Conservation Act 2004, and the Conservation Effectiveness Management Program (CEMP) both work to inform the management of biodiversity. The CEMP responds to ecological indicators in relation to land management and restoration. Without the CEMP many other policy actions would lack an evidence base to plan, deliver and review their performance. It is a critical part of the biodiversity monitoring and evaluation puzzle. ACT Nature Conservation Act and Nature Conservation Strategy management structure Partnerships Government Traditional Custodians Community Groups Institutions BIODIVERSITY RESEARCH AND MONITORING PROGRAM Reporting Evaluation Management of ACT national parks and reserves, rural and urban areas, and native plants and animals ACT Nature Conservation Act 2014 ACT Nature Conservation Strategy Infographic created by OCSE, information sourced from EPSDD. Scientific Committee The Nature Conservation Act Scientific Committee was established in 2015.115 It is a statutory independent expert body appointed by the Minister for the Environment. The committee advises on action plans, provides conservation advices on listing of threatened species, key threatening processes, and on ecological communities.116 Nature Conservation Strategy The Nature Conservation Strategy (subject to review every five years) outlines the principal biodiversity strategies: • enhance habitat connectivity and ecosystem function • manage threats to biodiversity • protect species and ecological communities • enhance biodiversity value of urban areas, and • strengthen community engagement.117 359 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report OCSE commentary 118 Audits are required every five years to determine EPBC Act 1999 compliance. See https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/ publications/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-gungahlin-strategic-assessment and https://www.envcomm.act.gov. au/publications/investigations/independent-audit-of-the-molonglo-valley-strategic-assessment accessed 2 December 2019. 119 Department of the Environment and Energy, EPBC 1999, ‘One-Stop Shop for Environmental Approvals’ webpage, found at http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/one-stop-shop, accessed 19 January 2019. 120 Environment and Planning Directorate, 2015, ACT Environmental Offsets Policy, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https:// www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/628758/ACT-Environmental-Offsets-Policy-ACCESS-PDF.PDF, accessed 8 October 2019. 121 Planning and Development Act 2007, Division 6A.2.3, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2007-24/ 2015 State of the Environment report recommendations Recommendations about documenting vegetation clearing, monitoring and evaluation, and connectivity of reserves, were made in the State of the Environment 2015 report. OCSE annual reports identify actions which have been taken. Gungahlin (2017) and Molonglo Valley (2018) Strategic Assessment Independent Audits Strategic Assessments involve national and subnational collaboration, are established pursuant to the EPBC Act 1999, and are agreed on the basis that MNES are protected during and after the development process. Commitments made by the ACT Government in relation to Gungahlin and Molonglo include indirect and direct offsets, land management plans, environmental research, and operational undertakings over 20 and 30 years (respectively). Audits of these Strategic Assessments have been undertaken in compliance with the EPBC Act 1999.118 The audits were conducted pursuant to directions about independence and provide for transparent reporting. Risks were assessed, corrective actions and recommendations were made, and affirmative government responses have been forthcoming. Systemic challenges, including timeliness of reporting and lack of adequate and secure funding for long term conservation projects, were identified as issues. Concerns have been expressed about ongoing community input once a Strategic Assessment has been settled. In general, pending the establishment of conservation baselines, sound progress in respect of MNES was evident. On-ground implementation of agreed Strategic Assessment commitments has been extensive, innovative, and monitoring has improved. Monitoring will provide a strong data baseline and build understanding of climate variability over the term of the project, assisting in policy development. Expert ecologists are now integral to decisions early in the planning phase to ensure that commitments are clear, based on best knowledge, ecologically effective, and practical to deliver. ACT ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSETS Consistent with the EPBC Act 1999 Environmental Offsets Policy,119 the ACT Environmental Offsets policy came into effect on 2 April 2015.120 The ACT policy has not yet been applied. All approvals for ACT environmental offsets have been processed using the Commonwealth guide. Most offset sites are managed by the Parks and Conservation Service. Every five years the Minister is required to consider whether a review of the offsets policy is necessary.121 The ACT Offsets Register provides information on offsets under the EPBC Act 1999 and the Planning and Development Act 2007 (ACT), areas, development, and information on environmental approvals, management and additional reports. ACTMapi provides geographic locations. Lower Cotter Catchment Restoration Evaluation – The Heroic and the Dammed report The Commissioner’s report on the Lower Cotter Catchment restoration noted similar challenges and is considered in the Water section below. 360 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy development 122 https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2018-33/default.asp see Part 9 of the Act accessed 15 October 2019. 123 Environment and Planning Directorate, 2013, ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23, Implementation Plan 1 (2013–2018), ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/576177/NCS-Impleme ntation-Plan-1-2013-2018.pdf, accessed 30 October 2019. Nature Conservation Act 2014 Amendments to the Nature Conservation Act 2014 were introduced in the reporting period to harmonise national and sub-national listing of threatened species and ecosystems. Further minor amendments in 2018 related to the provision of Conservation Advices.122 Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23 Nature Conservation Strategy reviews were conducted in 2015 and 2018. In 2018, 51 milestones had been ‘completed’ and 51 were ‘ongoing’. The 2016 Nature Conservation Strategy Implementation Plan 2013–18 Progress Report indicated progress against implementation actions as follows: • Improvements in baseline information on landscapes (vegetation communities, habitat connectivity and soil and hydrological landscapes) were shared via ACTMapi. • Restoration of 60,000 hectares of Box Gum Grassy Woodland was achieved via the ACT Woodlands Restoration Program (2011–18). • Grassland Enhancement Program research and on-ground trials improved management of habitat (Grassland Earless Dragon, Striped Legless Lizard, Button Wrinklewort, Small Purple Pea). • Native fish passage and habitat results were improved due to artificial fish habitat and engineered log jams conservation research. • Threatened species and threatened ecological communities protection improved with Scarlet Robin (2016), Murray Cod (2017) and Listed Migratory Species (2018) Action Plans. • 16 Action Plans were reviewed and updated. • Improved long-term monitoring for ecosystems was reported as a result of the CEMP. • Translocations and reintroductions of the Eastern Bettong, Eastern Quoll, Brown Treecreeper and New Holland Mouse were undertaken via the Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary and Mulligans Flat–Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment. Collaboration was integral with the private trust, ACT Government, CSIRO, ANU and the community working together. The Trust was awarded a Certificate of Excellence as an ecotourism destination in 2019 (Trip Advisor). • Brindabella Midge Orchid, Murrumbidgee Bossiaea, Tuggeranong Lignum and Ginninderra Peppercress seed banks were developed, collaborating with Australian National Botanic Gardens. • Continued strong community engagement is reflected in partnerships and citizen science: – ParkCare has been reinvigorated through the ParkCare Hub and four volunteering streams: ParkCarePatch, RangerAssist, WildlifeAssist and VisitorAssist – community research has been promoted through ParkCare Forums, a Woodlands Forum and a Symposium at Black Mountain – citizen science has been encouraged through the Canberra Nature Map, Upper Murrumbidgee Waterwatch, Frogwatch, the Woodlands and Wetlands Trust Latham’s Snipe Project, and – involvement of Indigenous people in woodland restoration, cultural burns, Caring for Country, has been improved by the Murrumbung Ranger Program.123 The second Implementation Plan (2019–23) was released in 2019 (outside the reporting period). 361 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program (BRAMP) 2015–2017 BRAMP establishes a two-year program of biodiversity research and monitoring activities.124 The program supports the ACT Conservator of Flora and Fauna and contributes a long-term strategic approach, better understanding and tracking of ecosystem condition, and an evidence base for policy, programs, resource allocation and reporting. BRAMP collaborates with ANU, University of Canberra, CSIRO and the community. Measurable targets, timelines, isolating and addressing delays, extensions of time and reporting are critical components of the processes established. Milestones from the BRAMP Implementation Report 2015–17 include: 124 EPSDD, 2015, Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program July 2015–June 2017, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https:// www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/754163/Biodiversity-Research-and-Monitoring-Program.pdf; ACT Government, Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program 2017–19, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/View/ni/2017- 306/20170701-66442/PDF/2017-306.PDF 125 ACT Government, Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program 2015–17 Implementation Report, found at https://www. environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/1108854/2015-17-BRAMP-Implementation-Report_ACCESS.pdf, accessed, 20 October 2019. 126 EPSDD, 2015, Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program July 2015–June 2017, ACT Government, Canberra https://www. environment.act.gov.au/cpr/review_of_the_nature_conservation_act/biodiversity-research-and-monitoring-program, accessed 29 October 2019. • completion of soil landscape mapping and the classification of and management guidance for hydrogeological landscapes (HGLs) • progress made on baseline vegetation mapping • progress made on the CEMP to establish a monitoring framework for 8 key ecosystem types represented in ACT Nature Reserves, and • improvements to data management, including through spatial tools.125 The majority of the 41 actions were reported to be on-track, 6 activities were delayed due to seasonal/weather factors and or absence of input data. The 2015–17 BRAMP has been superseded by BRAMP 2017–19 which has not yet undergone a review.126 Common blue damselfly. Source: Ryan Colley. 362 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES © Ryan Colley.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Conservation Effectiveness Management Program (CEMP) 2017 The CEMP127 is an ecosystem condition monitoring framework which emerged from a 2014 review of monitoring and evaluation within the reserve network. Through the CEMP, eight ecosystem condition monitoring plans are being developed. CEMP provides for the recognition of systematic and explicit knowledge needs in decision-making and is based on an adaptive management approach.128 The CEMP: • evaluates the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation outcomes • is a coordinated, systematic, robust framework to detect change in ecosystem condition • supports land management decisions through evidence-based assessments, and • identifies knowledge gaps to aid in prioritisation of future research. CEMP uses indicators to assess biodiversity values as well as threatening processes. For each indicator, a baseline condition, reference condition (commonly thought of as pre-European condition), and a target condition are defined to form the basis of condition assessments. Current condition, condition trend, and data confidence are all considered when making assessments. 127 Brawata, R. et al., 2017, Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program: An Overview, Technical Report, EPSDD, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1059241/Conservation-effectiveness-monitori ng-program.pdf, accessed 30 October 2019. 128 ACT Government, Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Program 2017–19, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/View/ ni/2017-306/20170701-66442/PDF/2017-306.PDF, accessed 1 October 2019. 129 EPSDD, 2017, Conservation Research Program Report 2015–17, Technical Report, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https:// www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/1127143/Conservation-Research-Program-Report-2015-17.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019. An implementation program report for 2015 to 2017129 concluded 15% progress against targets for the CEMP, with resource constraints and delays cited as issues when timeframes were extended by two years. The CEMP was identified as one of four highlights of the BRAMP. The CEMP has delivered several critical policy elements that involve new and complex research concepts: • a program overview document in 2017 • a lowland native grassland ecosystem condition monitoring program in 2017 • an upland native grassland ecosystem condition monitoring plan delivered in 2019, and • an aquatic and riparian ecosystem condition monitoring plan in review in 2019. Monitoring plans under development at the conclusion of the 2015–2019 reporting period included lowland woodlands, uplands woodlands, lowland forests, upland forests, and bogs and fens. 363 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Listing of Key Threatened Communities and Threatening Process and Action Plans The ACT Government has listed two key threatening processes in this reporting period. In response to a Conservation Council submission, the loss of mature native trees (including hollow-bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment was considered and listed (2019). The ACT Scientific Committee determined that the ecological community ‘High Country Bogs and Associated Fens’ was eligible for inclusion in the ACT Threatened Ecological Communities List (2019).130 A cross-jurisdictional Memorandum of Understanding131 aligns lists. The ACT has established 34 action plans for threatened species (3 mammals, 11 birds, 3 reptiles, 4 fish, 1 amphibian, 3 invertebrates and 9 plants).132 The ACT has established 2 action plans for ecological communities (Box Gum Woodland and Native Temperate Grassland) and Migratory Species (finalised in March 2018).133 Photos of species in the ACT listed as threatened. The OCSE acknowledges photo contributors which can be found at https://canberra.naturemapr.org/ 130 Scientific Committee ACT Nature Conservation (High Country Bogs and Associated Fens) Conservation Advice 2019 found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/conservation_and_ecological_communities/high-country-bogs-and-associated-fe ns-ecological-community accessed 2 December 2019. 131 Department of the Environment and Energy, A Common Assessment Method for the Listing of Nationally Threatened Species in Australia, Memorandum of Understanding, found at http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/threatened/cam, accessed 29 October 2019. 132 EPSDD webpage, Threatened Species Action Plans, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/conservation_and_ ecological_communities/threatened_species_action_plans, accessed 21 November 2019. 133 EPSDD webpage, Migratory Species Action Plan, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/conservation_and_ ecological_communities/threatened_species_action_plans/migratory-species-action-plan, accessed 21 November 2019. 364 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 365 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Strategies 134 Planning and Land Management, 2016, ACT Biosecurity Strategy 2016–2026, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/902293/ACT-Biosecurity-Strategy-2016-2026.pdf accessed on 30 October 2019, accessed 21 November 2019. 135 Achievements include the use of drones, monitoring through ArcGIS platform and dashboard, CEMP, Canberra Nature Map early detection, emergency responses to Madagascan Fireweed, Coolatai Grass, and better education of stakeholders (Weeds Wednesday initiative). 136 This included odour detection dogs, amphibious vehicles, mowing management guidelines, wash down facilities, nursery compliance checks, monitoring of sales on eBay and Gumtree. Across 2015–2019 this group promoted improved documentation of processes for recording, recommendations for urban landscape plantings, wider dissemination of biosecurity alerts, collaboration with Canberra Nature Map for identification of invasive species, collaboration with National Herbarium to assist in census of vascular plants, and development of the Invasive Plants Strategy 2020–2030. 137 Implementation included rapid reporting, a new licensing and compliance unit was established and a management team for rapid responses to Cane Toad and Red Whiskered Bulbul (2018) through incident management teams was developed. The release of K5 strain of RHC+DV1 for biological control of rabbits was actioned. Provision of metrics for wild dogs in accordance with the Wild Dog Action Plan, aerial surveys and shooting (deer), camera trapping to provide information on Sambal Deer and wild cats, rabbits and pigs, horse management (NSW–ACT border) were all advanced. 138 This reduced the number of non-native birds which can be kept without a license and a mid-term review was foreshadowed. 139 This work promoted governance arrangements, funding for pest animals management including aquatic pests, the development of the National Carp Control Plan, operational plans, and assessments. In 2016 secondary poisoning of non-target animals was the subject of a risk analysis with CSIRO and the NSW government. 140 These included the declaration of the Redfin Perch and National Noxious Fish list as prohibited from supply or retention, clarification of deer species, the upgrade of declarations about European wasp, European red fox, prohibitions on Weatherloach and Gambusia, and a provision ensuring notifications about Tilapia. 141 To address addressing Red imported fire ant, Browsing ant, Electric ant, national tropical weeds, and Red witchweed. 142 To address carp (National Carp Control Plan 2016, 2017, 2018, Region Carp Biocontrol Taskforce), rabbits, cats, pigs, kangaroos (macropod fertility control), and foxes (including by working with the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions 2005–2019). 143 EPSDD, 2018, Woodlands for Wildlife, ACT Lowland Woodlands Conservation Strategy, Progress Report 2018, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1333952/Woodlands-for-Wildlife-Progre ss-Report-2018.pdf, accessed 12 October 2019 Biosecurity Strategy – pests, weeds, and policing In 2016 the ACT instituted a Biosecurity Strategy.134 Specific programs which the ACT has promoted in the reporting period include: • 2019 ACT Weeds Strategy, building on a review of 2015–2019 strategy135 • Regional Weeds Advisory (non-statutory) Group establishment, exploring new technologies136 • 2017 ACT Alligator Weed Management Plan, collaboration with the National Capital Authority • 2016 Pest Plans and Animals (Serrated Tussock) Management Plan • 2012–22 ACT Pest Animal Management Strategy, continuing implementation137 • Exempt Animal Declaration (Nature Conservation Act 2014) was updated,138 and • 2015–19 Pest Animal Management Group (PAMG) governance and planning innovations.139 The 2016 Pest Plants and Animals Declaration (amendment) resulted in a number of declarations and clarifications.140 In 2019 this comprehensive list provided for 380 species of pest animals. Actions taken by the ACT Government in the federal domain on biosecurity in the reporting period include: • signing and revising the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity (2019) • providing detailed advice on the National Environmental Biosecurity Response Agreement (2017) • continuing involvement in the National Biosecurity Management Consultative Committee and National Management Groups141 • contributing to national policy on Australian Weeds and Pest Animal Strategies; National Invasive Ant Biosecurity Plan 2018–2028 • updating the list of Threat Categories of Non-Indigenous Vertebrates; policy on national biological control programs142 • presenting submissions on multiple invasive plant species and the Live Import List determinations.
 Landscape Conservation Strategies The Native Woodland Conservation Strategy (2019 Action Plan No 27) provides for reporting on the restoration of Box Gum Grassy Woodland through the ACT Woodlands Restoration Program (2011–18). The previous strategy had been in place since 2004. The strategy was broadened to include all woodland formations in the ACT, lowland and montane woodland communities (see the CEMP commentary above on restoration of 60,000 hectares of Box Gum Grassy Woodland).143 366 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report The Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy, and associated action plans, were updated in 2018, accepted by the Scientific Committee and approved by the Conservator after public comment. In 2017, the Native Grassland Conservation Strategy144 and associated action plans were updated. The previous strategy had been in place since 2005. The strategy guides and coordinates research, monitoring and conservation of native grasslands in the ACT, regardless of tenure and land use. ACT Cat Plan The policy of cat containment in certain suburbs has been reflected in the 2019 Cat Plan.145 This plan is critical for MNES commitments in the Gungahlin and Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessments. Over 3,000 survey responses and 100 submissions were received. Ongoing consultations The matters which follow will be finalised outside the reporting period. Draft Canberra Nature Park Reserve Management Plan Public comment opportunities on this Draft Plan are significant.146 This openness to public comment is an expression of best practice public policy development and reflects the general understanding and global movement that Healthy Parks and Healthy People are linked – parks are for people as well as for ecosystems and species.147 Aboriginal people’s connection to Country is embraced. 144 EPSDD, 2017, ACT Native Grassland Conservation Strategy and Action Plans, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1156951/Grassland-Strategy-Final-WebAccess.pdf accessed 12 October 2019. 145 EPSDD, 2019, Draft ACT Cat Plan 2019–29, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/ hdp.au.prod.app.act-yoursay.files/1615/5443/2948/Draft_ACT_Cat_Plan_-_ACCESS.pdf, accessed 29 October 2019 146 Your Say on the Canberra Nature Park, found at https://www.yoursay.act.gov.au/act-parks/canberra-nature-park, accessed on 30 October 2019. 147 Foundation for National Parks and Wildlife, ‘Healthy Parks, Healthy People’, found at https://www.fnpw.org.au/projects/parks-for-people, accessed on 30 October 2019. 148 ACT Environment and Recreation 2007, Namadgi National Park Feral Horse Management Plan 2007, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/901957/NNP-Feral-Horse-Mgt-Plan-2007.pdf, accessed 30 October 2019. 149 Found at https://aboutregional.com.au/act-government-to-update-brumbies-management-plan-declare-brumbies-pest-animals/, accessed 30 October 2019. Fisheries Act review A review of the Fisheries Act 2000 (ACT), including public consultation, was undertaken in 2017–2018. Issues identified included compliance and enforcement, provision of information and education, licencing or registration schemes for anglers, alignment with NSW fishing rules, access to fishing places, importance of conservation of species and habitats, tourism opportunities for fishing, pest species including carp, trout fishing and stocking, and Indigenous cultural rights. Protection of biodiversity and promotion of compatible recreation underpins the proposed amendments. The Fisheries Legislation Amendment Bill 2019 is before the Legislative Assembly. Key amendments include prohibitions on gear, new enforcement provisions, and aquaculture management. Management of feral horses in the Namadgi National Park Management of feral horses across the NSW– ACT border illustrates some cross-jurisdictional challenges. NSW policy has the capacity to impact the ACT’s management of the Namadgi National Park. The ACT Feral Horse Management Plan 2007148 addresses concerns in the Territory. The ACT has used the recent Bogs and Fens declaration to advance the protection of the national park and the ACT’s water supply.149 367 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report WATER 150 International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), World Commission on Protected Areas, ‘Management Effectiveness’, found at https://www.iucn.org/commissions/world-commission-protected-areas/our-work/management-effectiveness, accessed 21 October 2019. 151 Based on time between target dates in 2014 policy to dates released to public (https://www.environment.act.gov.au/cpr/ reserve-management-plans accessed on 31 October 2019. 152 EPSDD, 2014, ACT Water Strategy 2014–44, Striking the Balance, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www. environment.act.gov.au/water/water-strategies-and-plans/act_water_strategy and its associated Implementation plans accessed on 21 October 2019. 153 https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1215833/Water-Strategy-Implementation-Plan-2018.pdf accessed 23 August 2019. 154 See Department of Agriculture webpage, Australian Capital Territory Water Programmes in the Murray-Darling Basin, found at https://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/mdb/programs/act, accessed 20 November 2019. Overview As with all environmental policy, water policy is ever evolving and complex. The Water Resources Act 2009 (ACT), Environmental Protection Act 1997, and the ACT Integrated Catchment Management Plan (the State of the Environment 2015 report recommended the establishment of this plan) are all impacted by the National Water Reform agenda, the Council of Australian Governments’ (COAG) urban water reform initiatives, the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, and the Regional Collaboration MOU (2011). The ACT sits in the Murray-Darling Basin as the Murrumbidgee River catchment feeds into that Basin. As a function of this level of oversight, water policy action plans, progress reporting, monitoring, evaluation and review is transparent and accountable. Organisational structures are formal and secure, planning is effective, inputs are provided, process is relevant, and outputs are generally clear.150 Community and citizen scientists are actively involved in water monitoring and biodiversity reporting. Delays and questions about the need for a sustainable funding model for monitoring and evaluation across portfolios continue to arise. Management plans for the Molonglo River Reserve, Lower Cotter Catchment, and Googong Foreshore, were all delayed more than 2 years beyond target dates.151 Implementation plans are still required. Even though this was not detected in these examples such delays have the potential to compound, as was observed in the OCSE report on the Lower Cotter catchment. Communicating the reason for delays and other progress issues should be more detailed and open. Responsiveness of water planning to climate change will continue to produce policy and operational tests for the ACT Government. Policy context Water Strategy 2014–2044: Striking the Balance The ACT’s Water Strategy 2014–2044: Striking the Balance has been the overarching ACT policy since 2014.152 The strategy builds on the previous policy Think Water Act Water 2004 as actions are ‘continuing’, and it also sits in a complicated web of other water initiatives including the Basin Priority Plan. ACT water planning complies with the Sustainable Diversion Limits established in the Murray-Darling Basin plan. The Water Strategy has been implemented with 27 of 31 milestones being completed or on track as at June 2019. In 2018 a regular five year review produced a Report Card on Implementation Plan 1.153 Implementation Plan 2 was released in 2019 and includes a review of the Water Resources Act 2007. In 2019 the ACT lodged its Water Resources Plans for surface and groundwater in accordance with the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. Murray-Darling Basin Priority Project for the ACT The ACT Government is party to a major funding agreement (up to $85 million) with the Federal Government to deliver the ACT Basin Priority Project to improve long-term water quality in the ACT and broader Murrumbidgee River system. The project follows a clear logic, with variations undertaken according to clear directions.154 Phase 1, implementing comprehensive water monitoring, was completed in 2016. Phase 2 is informed by the data collection, analysis and modelling from Phase 1. Phase 2, which involves construction of infrastructure interventions capable of delivering substantial water quality improvements, is being evaluated through to August 2021. 368 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report OCSE COMMENTARY THE HEROIC AND THE DAMMED: LOWER COTTER CATCHMENT RESTORATION EVALUATION 2018 ELEVATED METALS ELEVATED NUTRIENTS SEDIMENTATION PATHOGENS CHEMICAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE STRESSOR ASH BARE GROUND CHEMICAL APPLICATION FAECAL MATTER RESPONSE POPULATION GROWTH Risk factors inﬂuencing the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework Recreational access Pest weed species Uncontrolled ﬁre Controlled ﬁre Commercial forestry Roading network Pest animal species IMPACT NATURAL ENVIRONMENT DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY AND QUALITY ©Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment. CLIMATE CHANGE Infographic created by OCSE. Source: OCSE report, The Heroic and the Dammed. 155 ACT Emergency Services Agency (ESA), 2019, Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://esa.act.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-09/ESA%20Strategic%20Bushfire%20Management%20Plan2019- 2024_ACCESSIBLE.pdf, accessed 21 October 2019. In 2018, as the Lower Cotter Catchment Reserve Management Plan was being developed, the restoration of the Lower Cotter Catchment was reviewed by the OCSE. The OCSE report had been foreshadowed by the ACT Auditor-General (Report 3/15) and was the subject of a Ministerial direction. The final report, The Heroic and the Dammed: Lower Cotter Catchment Restoration Evaluation, noted the delay in the delivery of the Reserve Management Plan. Policy gaps were revealed, including the absence of an implementation plan and an effective monitoring and evaluation program to inform risks such as erosion hazard, feral species, and climate change. Review of the proposed monitoring and evaluation framework was recommended to align to the statutory reporting requirements contained in the Reserve Management Plan to support adaptive management practices. The report made 14 recommendations under 5 main themes: • monitoring and evaluation implementation • funding and resources commitment • governance improvements • coordination of efforts, and • legislative interventions. All recommendations were accepted or accepted in principle except for the recommendation which linked funding to the Water Abstraction Charge. Action is under way to address priority actions in the Reserve Management Plan while the Implementation Plan is under development. Action on abandoned vehicles which constitute a fire risk has now been addressed in Action 1.4 of the ACT’s Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024.155 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES 369.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Canberra Urban Lakes and Ponds Plan of Management – outstanding review A review of the Canberra Urban Lakes and Ponds Plan of Management 2001156 is overdue (Water Strategy, action 2.4). The last review was completed in 2015. Public consultation has been delayed beyond 2018. Water Sensitive Urban Design Code – review is under way The current Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD) code is from 2009. It was reviewed in 2014. Recommendations to improve monitoring, modelling and community engagement were noted in 2015. The Living Infrastructure Plan: Cooling the City 2019 sets out a number of opportunities for WSUD. Policy development Healthy Waterways: Secure resources and holistic policy responses Healthy Waterways157 sets out to achieve water quality outcomes. It is securely resourced, has clear policy goals, is subject to monitoring and evaluation, and research and community engagement are embedded in its delivery. The Commonwealth and the ACT fund the installation of nineteen water quality infrastructure assets across Canberra. Stormwater Municipal Infrastructure Standards have been amended to integrate water quality infrastructure components and improve contractual clarity (MIS08, Water Strategy, Action 3.1). The inner north stormwater trial will be evaluated in 2020, providing an important policy feedback loop. 156 Urban Services, 2001, Canberra’s Urban Lakes and Ponds Plan of Management, ACT Government Canberra, found at https://www.tccs.act.gov.au/city-living/recreation/waterways/lakesandponds/lakesandpondspom, accessed 23 August 2019 157 The ACT Healthy Waterways webpage is found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/water/ACT-Healthy-Waterways, accessed 21 October 2019. 158 Schirmer, J. and M. Mylek, 2016, ‘Water Quality and the Community: Understanding the Views, Values, Actions of Residents of the ACT and Surrounding Region’, Institute for Applied Ecology and Health Research Institute, University of Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/874695/Water-expectations-survey-summary.pdf, accessed 21 October 2019. H2OK: Cross-border collaboration on community education H2OK was the ACT’s first cross-border stormwater education program. The Institute of Applied Ecology at the University of Canberra reported on the views, values, and actions of the community.158 The construction industry is understood to be a key target stakeholder group. A genuine effort has been made to explain policy interventions and deliver effective education to achieve those policy initiatives. Murray-Darling Basin Priority Project – Integrated Water Monitoring Plan 2017 The Murray-Darling Basin Priority Project integrated water quality monitoring program began in 2017 and enhances land and water management policy through scientific monitoring. Initiatives for monitoring including automated water quality sampling (Water Strategy, action 4.1), modelling and data management have been outputs. Centralising the data management system will facilitate collaboration and improve operational and strategic decision making and resilience in a changing climate. Research on blue-green algae in urban lakes is also linked to this priority project. 370 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Ginini Flats Wetland Complex Ramsar Site Plan of Management 2017  Ramsar-listed Ginini Flats Wetland. Source: OCSE. 159 Wild, A. et al., 2010,’Ginini Flats Wetland Complex Ramsar Site Ecological Character Description’, unpublished report to the Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities, Entura, Hobart, found at https://www. environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/1ad9f676-2669-4263-96b4-7672a053bfd5/files/45-ecd.pdf 160 Nature Conservation (Ginini Flats Wetland Complex Ramsar Site) Management Plan 2017, found at https://www.legislation.act. gov.au/di/2017-36/default.asp, accessed 21 October 2019. The Ginini Flats Wetland is the only Ramsar site in the ACT.159 Ginini is the largest intact sphagnum bog and fen community in the Australian Alps. The Ramsar Convention calls for the wise use of wetlands to be ‘achieved through the implementation of ecosystem approaches’. The value of the Ginini Flats to water quality in the ACT’s catchments is recognised as providing both habitat and ecosystem services such as water filtration. In 2001 a non-statutory plan of management was designed. The Ginini Flats were seriously damaged by the 2003 bushfires and have taken time to recover, with significant operational intervention on the part of the ACT Government. In 2009 the Commonwealth listed Alpine Sphaghnum Bogs and Associated Fens as ecological communities. The Ginini Flats Management Plan was released in 2017.160 It is the first statutory plan of management. Indicative of the complex nature of environmental management policy, the plan addresses Indigenous values, hydrological changes, peatland issues, invasive animals, pathogen problems, threatened fauna, amelioration of climate change, and research, monitoring and evaluation needs. 371 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Aquatic Species and Riparian Conservation Strategy 2018 The ACT Aquatic Species and Riparian Conservation Strategy (Action Plan 29) was reviewed and finalised in 2018.161 The strategy details conservation management guidelines, monitoring and research objectives, and action plans for threatened species. Drought policy: complex alignment 2018 In 2018, the ACT developed a drought policy in response to water security and biodiversity concerns on the 160 rural (farming) landholdings in the ACT. The policy aligns with the COAG National Drought Agreement, is delivered with active community engagement, and includes: • the National On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme and Australian Government assistance • ACT Rural Resilience Grants (for desilting dams, establishing bores, tanks, pipes and troughs) • requirements for interstate fodder purchases, relief grazing and transport subsidies, and • access to the Financial and Mental Health Service.162 161 EPSDD, 2018, ACT Aquatic and Riparian Conservation Strategy and Action Plans, ACT Government Canberra, found at https:// www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1244729/ACT-Aquatic-and-Riparian-Conservation-Strategy.pdf, accessed 21 October 2019. 162 EPSDD, ACT Farmers’ Support Package, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/act-nrm/ act-farmers-support-package#National%20On-Farm%20Emergency%20Water%20Infrastructure%20Rebate, accessed 21 October 2019. 163 EPSDD, 2017, ACT Water Strategy Report Card Implementation Plan One (2014–18), ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1215833/Water-Strategy-Implementation-Plan-2018.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. 164 EPSDD, 2017, ACT Water Strategy Report Card Implementation Plan One (2014–18), ACT Government, Canberra: 18, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/1215833/Water-Strategy-Implementation-Plan-2018.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. 165 ACT Health Protection Service, 2014, ‘Guidelines for Recreational Water Quality’, ACT Government, Canberra, found at http://www.health.act.gov.au/public-information/public-health/recreational-water-quality, accessed 31 October 2019. 166 Activities suitable for water bodies are listed in the Territory Plan and detailed in the ‘Canberra’s Urban Lakes and Ponds Plan of Management’ and the ‘Murrumbidgee River Corridor Plan of Management’. Flood strategy Whilst progress has been achieved with flood maps for eight catchments now available on ACTMapi (Water Strategy: action 10), issues in flood management were identified in the 2018 Implementation Plan Report Card.163 The ESA continues to work on refining the 2016 draft flood strategy document (Water Strategy: action 9.1). The development of a mapping system to identify overland flow paths and WSUD devices within the network was unfunded but TCCS now reports progress and a need for further ‘effort’.164 Water Strategy action 10.3, which requires the review of codes relating to flooding, remains unfunded. Guidelines for recreational water quality The ACT Government and EPA manage Lake Ginninderra, Lake Tuggeranong, the Molonglo Reach and Murrumbidgee River Corridor, and 116 ponds and wetlands. The NCA manages Lake Burley Griffin. ACT Guidelines for Recreational Water Quality were reviewed in 2014–15 (Water Strategy, action 16.1 and 16.2.)165 but it should be noted that these guidelines only apply to lakes and river sites where primary contact recreational activities are permitted.166 372 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Management plans Molonglo River Reserve Management Plan 2019 The Molonglo River Reserve Management Plan 2019 167 addresses the need to protect flora and fauna, provide recreational opportunities, and minimise the risk of bushfire. Objectives and policy approaches are clear. This reserve management plan is a disallowable instrument under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 and can be viewed on the legislation register. Lower Cotter Catchment Reserve Management Plan 2018 The Lower Cotter Catchment Reserve Management Plan was released in 2018.168 This plan has an operational life of 10 years. The plan intends the reserve to be restored to a fully functioning landscape of native vegetation which produces clean water, conserves natural and cultural values, and provides low-impact recreational opportunities. This reserve management plan is also a disallowable instrument under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 and is available on the legislation register. Plan of Management for Googong Foreshores Googong Foreshores was resumed by the Commonwealth Government from NSW more than 40 years ago for the purpose of ensuring the supply of water to the ACT, Queanbeyan and Googong Township. A lease between the Commonwealth and the ACT Executive was executed in 2008 and the ACT manages the Googong Dam area. The management plan for the Foreshores has been undergoing a detailed review since 2016, intended for completion in 2020. 167 ACT Government, Nature Conservation (Molonglo River Reserve) Reserve Management Plan 2019, found at https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/View/di/2019-192/current/PDF/2019-192.PDF, accessed 31 October 2019. 168 EPSDD, 2018, Lower Cotter Catchment Reserve Management Plan 2018, ACT Government, Canberra, found at https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1166565/Lower-Cotter-Catchment-Reserve- Management-Plan-ACCESS.pdf, accessed 31 October 2019. 373 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report FIRE 169 Hughes, L. and W. Steffen, 2014, Be Prepared: Climate Change and the ACT Bushfire Threat, Climate Council of Australia, found at http://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/a56c563caa5bb336050ed88c60dba7e4.pdf, accessed 2 December 2019. Overview In 2014 Professor Will Steffen and Lesley Hughes outlined bushfire concerns in the ACT.169 The 2003 bushfires led to the passage of the Emergencies Act 2004 (ACT) and a policy commitment to strategic bushfire management plans. Policy context Between 2015 and 2019 the ACT Government operated its fire planning regime subject to the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (2014 SBMP Version 3). Version 3 of this plan is now defunct, replaced by the 2019–2024 Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (Version 4) (Emergencies Act 2004). The actions in Version 4 are outlined below. OCSE commentary Lower Cotter Catchment Restoration Evaluation 2018 Recommendation 5.1 in the Lower Cotter Report urged the Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999 be amended to allow for the immediate removal of abandoned vehicles as the arson of these vehicle is responsible for fires in the Lower Cotter catchment. Cultural burning for the 21st Century. Source: OCSE. 374 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report Policy development Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (Version 4) 2019 The ACT’s Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024 was launched in September 2019. This falls outside the reporting period but it is noted the objectives and actions in the new plan are supported by planning, programs, and discrete operational efforts. The actions in the plan are: • Action 1 relates to education, investigations, predictive modelling, and development of a whole-of-government procedure to rapidly remove abandoned vehicles. • Action 2 relates to fire management on private lands, including FireWise Plans, coordination and volunteering. • Action 3 focuses on communications and research. • Action 4 promotes skills, minimum standards and training. • Action 5 sets out annual exercises and technical expertise. • Action 6 sets out timeframes, capability, a review of the ACT Elevated Fire Danger Plan and proactive capability. • Action 7 considers inclusion of Indigenous cultural knowledge and issues relating to threatened species, which generally relates to operational matters such as fuel reduction, audits and assessments, data sharing, and post-fire vegetation responses. • Action 8 reviews access questions. • Action 9 addresses adaptive management, embedding climate change research and concerns around models, monitoring of biodiversity, impacts on fauna, habitat structure and aquatic ecosystems, including governance oversight. • Action 10 looks at refining mapping, zoning, community information forums, the needs of the Lower Cotter, the revision of bushfire risk in the Territory Plan review, and exploring residual risk modelling. • Action 11 integrates urban edge considerations such as audits in Asset Protection Zones, tree canopy targets, facilities for the vulnerable, mandating the bushfire-related construction requirements in the Building Code of Australia and edge roads, and requirements for ESA approvals on blocks within bushfire-prone areas. • Lastly, Action 12 describes the need to support recovering communities. 375 06 GOVERNMENT RESPONSES.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report 376 06 Government responses to environmental issues in the ACT.
ACT State of the Environment | 2019 Report.
Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment P: GPO Box 158 Canberra, ACT 2601 T: (02) 6207 2626 E: envcomm@act.gov.au environmentcommissioner.act.gov.au.
.
PART A 1 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY AND ACTION PLANS.
Produced by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development © Australian Capital Territory, Canberra 2019 This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, no part may be reproduced by any process without written permission from: Director-General, Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government, GPO Box 158, Canberra ACT 2601. Telephone: 02 6207 1923 Website: www.planning.act.gov.au Acknowledgment to Country We wish to acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land we are meeting on, the Ngunnawal people. We wish to acknowledge and respect their continuing culture and the contribution they make to the life of this city and this region. Accessibility The ACT Government is committed to making its information, services, events and venues as accessible as possible. If you have difficulty reading a standard printed document and would like to receive this publication in an alternative format, such as large print, please phone Access Canberra on 13 22 81 or email the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate at EPSDDComms@act.gov.au If English is not your first language and you require a translating and interpreting service, please phone 13 14 50. If you are deaf, or have a speech or hearing impairment, and need the teletypewriter service, please phone 13 36 77 and ask for Access Canberra on 13 22 81. For speak and listen users, please phone 1300 555 727 and ask for Canberra Connect on 13 22 81. For more information on these services visit http://www.relayservice.com.au PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER.
PART A 3 CONTENTS VISION ............................................................................................................. 7 INTRODUCTION............................................................................................... 8 I. SCOPE OF THE STRATEGY............................................................................ 8 II. OBJECTIVES OF THE STRATEGY.................................................................. 8 III. STRUCTURE OF THE STRATEGY................................................................. 9 IV. ACTION PLANS AND CONSERVATION ADVICE............................................ 9 V. IMPLEMENTATION. ..................................................................................... 10 VI. WOODLAND COMMUNITIES IN THE ACT.................................................. 12 PART A............................................................................................................ 17 1. PROTECT AND MANAGE WOODLAND AND COMPONENT SPECIES. ......... 17 1.1 Retain and protect native woodlands .........................................................17 1.2 Reduce threats to native woodland biodiversity.......................................21 Urbanisation ......................................................................................................21 Overgrazing ........................................................................................................23 Inappropriate fire regimes ..............................................................................25 Invasive plants. ...................................................................................................28 Pest animals ......................................................................................................30 Dieback................................................................................................................33 Climate change..................................................................................................35 1.3 Enhance resilience, ecosystem function and habitat connectivity........37 Maintain and improve woodland condition ...............................................37 Implement ecologic ally appropriate herbage mass management. .......42 Enhance habitat connectivity.........................................................................45 2. COLLABORATE WITH THE COMMUNITY.................................................... 46 2.1 Promote community participation in woodland conservation..............46 Collaborate with rural landholders. ...............................................................46 Support community participation and raise community awareness ....48 Enhance and promote citizen science..........................................................50 Enhance the participation of Aboriginal people.........................................51 2.2. Support sustainable recreational use of woodlands...............................53 3. MONITORING AND RESEARCH . ................................................................. 54 3.1 Monitor woodland condition. ........................................................................54 Collect baseline information...........................................................................55 3.2 Address knowledge gaps in woodland conservation ..............................57.
4 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 4. BACKGROUND INFORMATION .................................................................. 60 4.1 What is a woodland?.......................................................................................60 4.2 A brief history of woodland in the ACT and surrounding region............60 4.3 Threatened and uncommon woodland species in the ACT....................64 4.4 Traditional and contemporary Aboriginal values......................................69 4.5 Woodland management plans . ....................................................................69 4.6 Relevant policy and legislation.....................................................................71 4.7 Progress since the 2004 Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy....72 4.8 Woodland conservation and research activities in the ACT since 2004.................................................................................................74 5. APPENDICES ............................................................................................. 80 5.1. Lowland and subalpine woodland communities in the ACT.................80 5.2. Conservation objectives identified in this Strategy ranked by conservation imperative....................................................................83 5.3 List of acronyms...............................................................................................94 REFERENCES................................................................................................. 95 PART B - ACTION PLANS.............................................................................. 109 YELLOW BOX–BLAKELY’S RED GUM GRASSY WOODLAND......................... 111 CANBERRA SPIDER ORCHID........................................................................ 137 SCARLET ROBIN. .......................................................................................... 145 SMALL PURPLE PEA. .................................................................................... 161 SUPERB PARROT......................................................................................... 171 TARENGO LEEK ORCHID. ............................................................................. 191.
PART A 5 FIGURES Figure 1: Distribution of woodland communities across the ACT.....................13 Figure 2: Distribution of lowland woodland patches larger than 100ha in the ACT .....................................................................................................................18 Figure 3: Distribution of lowland and subalpine woodland across tenures in the ACT..........................................................................................20 Figure 4: Historic (pre 1750) and current (2018) distribution of lowland woodlands in the ACT............................................................................63 TABLES Table 1: Woodland communities across land tenures in the ACT ....................19 Table 2: Invasive plants present in woodlands in the ACT..................................29 Table 3: Threatened flora and fauna species found in woodlands...................65 Table 4: Rare flora and fauna species found in woodlands in the ACT. ............67 Table 5: Management Plans for areas that include woodland in the ACT......70 BOXES Box 1: The objectives outlined in the Strategy aim to meet the ACT Government’s four key goals for woodland conservation.................................... 9 Box 2: Burning subalpine woodlands to reduce the risk of wildfire.................26 Box 3: Dingoes (Canis lupus), a controlled native species ................................31 Box 4: Barrer Hill restoration project .....................................................................40 Box 5: Collaborative management of Stirling Park..............................................50 Box 6: Impacts on Aboriginal cultural sites within woodlands.........................52 Box 7: Canberra Ornithologists Group undertakes critical monitoring of woodland birds . ..........................................................................................................55 Box 8: Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment. ..........................58.
6 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY.
PART A 7 VISION The people of the ACT working together to create healthy and diverse woodlands for future generations. Native upland and lowland woodlands cover over 79 000 hectares in the ACT and have significant biodiversity, recreation and cultural values. The protection of our woodlands is critical for the survival of a range of flora and fauna associated with these ecosystems, including threatened species. Meaningful collaboration between many knowledgeable stakeholders is critical to maintain and enhance these systems. The ACT Government acknowledges the Ngunnawal people as the Traditional Custodians of the land and waters in the ACT and recognises the importance of their spiritual connections and cultural obligations to Country. For thousands of years Traditional Custodians (and neighbouring language groups) relied on, and actively manipulated woodlands in the region. This has shaped the structure and function of these ecosystems. Woodlands were widespread prior to European settlement; the current distribution reflects the preferential clearing of the most fertile areas. While much of the historic distribution of subalpine woodland remains today, many lowland woodlands persist as small, often degraded remnants, amongst forest or grassland. The ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy identifies conservation objectives to protect, maintain and improve our woodlands, while prioritising effective collaboration. Since the 2004 Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy additional woodland has been protected, and significant management, restoration and research and monitoring has been undertaken. This Strategy aims to build on these successes and inform the ongoing protection and adaptive management of our lowland and subalpine woodlands. By working together, we can conserve these areas and their values now and for the future..
8 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY INTRODUCTION I. SCOPE OF THE STRATEGY The ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy (hereafter the Strategy) supersedes and builds on the achievements of the 2004 ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (hereafter the 2004 Woodland Strategy). It has a broader scope, including both lowland and subalpine native woodland communities across all tenures and land uses. Woodland is a general term to describe ecosystems that contain widely spaced trees with crowns that do not overlap. The Strategy considers woodland in all conditions, including areas where the canopy and woody midstorey have been largely cleared (i.e. areas of secondary / derived grassland) and the Endangered Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland community (hereafter Endangered YB-BRG Woodland). II. OBJECTIVES OF THE STRATEGY The purpose of this Strategy is to guide the management and conservation of lowland and subalpine woodlands in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) for the next 10 years. The Strategy is closely aligned with goals outlined in the ACT Nature Conservation Strategy (ACT Government, 2013a). It identifies how the ACT Government intends to manage threats, safeguard threatened species, enhance woodland structural complexity, undertake monitoring and research, and enhance resilience, ecosystem function and connectivity of woodlands. Collaboration between the ACT Government, non-government entities, the Commonwealth Government and other regional and national partners is considered critical to ensure the successful management and protection of our woodlands into the future. This Strategy is a reference document for ACT and Australian Government agencies, community groups, landholders, and other stakeholders with responsibilities and interest in the conservation, planning and management of lowland and subalpine woodlands. This Strategy has four key goals, which are defined below and are outlined in Box 1. The development and execution of the Woodland Conservation Implementation Plan (CIP) (outlined in v), and the implementation of actions outlined in the action plans (Part B) will be critical to meeting the goals of this Strategy. Protect. Commonwealth and ACT statutory requirements and ACT Government policies protect threatened species (and threatened communities) and other fauna and flora associated with woodlands within and outside formal reserves. Maintain. Ongoing intervention is required to mitigate the impacts of a range of threats to woodland communities and associated flora and fauna. Management practices must adhere to best practice and be informed by an adaptive management system. Improve. Management activities must, wherever appropriate, aim to enhance ecosystem function of woodlands by improving the condition and connectivity of woodlands. Enhancing ecosystem function improves a community’s resilience to existing and emerging threats, including climate change. Collaborate. Successful protection and management of woodlands requires collaboration between the ACT Government, non-government entities and the broader community. This includes promoting and managing the sustainable use of woodlands within and outside of reserves..
PART A 9 Box 1: The objectives outlined in the Strategy aim to meet the ACT Government’s four key goals for woodland conservation PROTECT MAINTAIN IMPROVE COLLABORATE RELEVANT OBJECTIVES 1.1  Retain and protect native woodlands 3.1  Monitor woodland condition 3.2  Address knowledge gaps in woodland conservation 1.2  Reduce threats to native woodland biodiversity 3.1  Monitor woodland condition 3.2  Address knowledge gaps in woodland conservation 1.2  Reduce threats to native woodland biodiversity 1.3  Enhance resilience, ecosystem function and habitat connectivity 3.2  Address knowledge gaps in woodland conservation 3.1  Monitor woodland condition 2.1  Promote community participation in woodland conservation 2.2  Support sustainable recreational use of woodlands 3.1  Monitor woodland condition 3.2  Address knowledge gaps in woodland conservation III. STRUCTURE OF THE STRATEGY This document is divided into two main sections, Part A and Part B. Part A outlines the primary objectives for woodland conservation in the ACT. These objectives are grouped under three overarching themes: → →Protect and manage woodland and component species → →Collaborate with the community → →Monitoring and research Section 5.2 of Part A ranks the imperative of conservation objectives identified under these themes for lowland and subalpine woodlands, and secondary grasslands. Part A also includes background information on woodlands in the ACT and the broader region, and an overview of a range of research and other projects that have informed this Strategy. Part B summarises the relevant literature and details objectives specific to the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland and fauna and flora species that are dependent on woodlands in the ACT and are listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. This information is provided as a set of self-contained action plans. IV. ACTION PLANS AND CONSERVATION ADVICE The Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing draft action plans or conservation advice for each species or ecological community listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Action plans and conservation advice are statutory documents and are prepared with expert input from the ACT Scientific Committee. An action plan for the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community and action plans for three plants and two birds are included in Part B of this document. These include: → →Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis) → →Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) → →Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) → →Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang) → →Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum). Each action plan provides a detailed description of the community or species, its conservation status, ecology, key threats, and an outline of the major conservation objectives and intended management actions. Conservation advice for the following woodland- dependant birds will be available on the ACT Government’s Environment website:.
10 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY → →Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus victoriae) → →Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata cucullata) → →Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta) → →Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) → →Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor) → →Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) → →White-Winged Triller (Lalage tricolor). LINKS BETWEEN THIS STRATEGY AND ACTION PLANS Action plans and conservation advice guide actions to benefit threatened species and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community. This Strategy provides overarching conservation goals and principles on which to base these actions. It also provides a framework for planning and prioritising actions across the range of woodland sites in the ACT. DEVELOPMENT AND REVIEW OF ACTION PLANS AND CONSERVATION ADVICE Since the 2004 Woodland Strategy, action plans for 12 threatened species dependant on woodlands have been reviewed and provided to the ACT Scientific Committee for assessment. The Committee assesses a plan with reference to the objectives and performance indicators in that action plan, and the progress that can reasonably have been expected within the review timeframe. Action plans for a number of species have been converted to conservation advice documents. Specific management actions, outside of those identified in this Strategy for the protection of woodland habitat (including the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland Action Plan), were considered unnecessary for the persistence of these species. The ACT Government will continue to develop and implement action plans and conservation advice for threatened species and threatened ecological communities, and will regularly review progress towards achieving their conservation objectives. V. IMPLEMENTATION The ACT Government is responsible for coordinating and implementing the objectives outlined in this Strategy on ACT Government managed land, and for collaborating with various partners to meet objectives on other land tenures. The development of the Woodland Conservation Implementation Plan (CIP) is required to ensure the objectives outlined in this Strategy are effectively implemented. The development of the Woodland CIP will involve a review and synthesis of commitments and objectives outlined in this Strategy (including threatened species action plans) and other strategic documents that are relevant to the conservation of woodlands in the ACT. These include reserve management plans (e.g. (ACT Government, 2010b), documented offset commitments, the Woodland Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program (CEMP) (in development), and several ACT management strategies (ACT Government, 2007a, 2009, 2012a, 2013a, 2014, 2016a, 2017a). The Woodland CIP will include specific actions to be carried out to meet the priority objectives outlined in these documents. This will guide the development of operational plans for relevant business units within the ACT Government. LOCAL, REGIONAL AND NATIONAL COOPERATION Protection and management of woodland in the ACT requires effective collaboration between the ACT Government and a range of stakeholders. This includes sharing knowledge, resources and skills with local, regional and national land managers, environmental authorities, and other knowledge holders (including research institutions, Aboriginal and other community members). The ACT Government must work closely with rural landholders, and community groups who are active in woodland conservation, to undertake on-ground management and community education activities. There is also a critical need to work with Commonwealth agencies responsible for managing woodland sites in the ACT (i.e. Department of Defence and National Capital Authority). National and regional cooperation is central to considering a broader spatial perspective of woodland and woodland-associated species management..
PART A 11 This is critical to ensure the persistence of species that are dependent on conservation measures outside of the ACT (e.g. Superb Parrot and Tarengo Leek Orchid) and to support woodlands to successfully adapt to climate change. Under the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (hereafter the EPBC Act), the ACT Government is responsible for ensuring the appropriate management of several woodland-associated ‘matters of national environmental significance’. This includes the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community and several flora and fauna species (see Table 3 and Section 4.3). Endangered YB-BRG woodland found in the ACT is a component of the White Box–Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland community, listed as critically endangered according to the EPBC Act. The action plan for this community (Part B) is in line with the National Recovery Plan (Commonwealth Government, 2010). As outlined in the ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (ACT Government, 2019), the ACT Government currently undertakes collaborative fire management planning with NSW agencies. Collaboration between the ACT Government and NSW (and ACT) rural landholders and government agencies has also been critical to the success of a number of woodland restoration projects (e.g. the ACT Woodland Restoration and Biodiversity Fund Project [see Section 4]), offset management planning (see TRC Tourism (2016)), research and translocations of woodland species (e.g. New Holland Mouse (Pseudomys novaehollandiae) into Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary), and pest animal management. The management of subalpine woodlands is part of the Australian Alps Cooperative Management Program with Commonwealth, NSW and Victorian authorities. This program aims to establish best practice management to protect the natural and cultural values of the Australian Alps National Parks. Snow Gum woodland, Mt Ginini (M. Jekabsons) Snow Gum woodland, Mt Ginini (M. Jekabsons).
12 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY VI. WOODLAND COMMUNITIES IN THE ACT This Strategy provides prescriptions for the ongoing protection and management of twelve woodland communities, including seven subalpine and five lowland systems that cover over 79 000 ha in the ACT (Figure 1 and Section 5.1). Subalpine woodlands occur between 730 m and 1910 m above sea level and cover approximately 48 409 ha of the ACT. They occur in the high country in the west and southern parts of the ACT, primarily in Namadgi National Park and Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve. Eucalypt species dominate the canopy of subalpine woodlands and the understorey is dominated by native tussock grasses and a diversity of herbs and forbs. The most widespread subalpine woodland communities in the ACT are those dominated by Snow Gum / Candlebark (U27), Snow Gum / Mountain Gum / Daviesia mimosoides (U28), and Mountain Gum / Snow Gum / Robertson’s Peppermint (Eucalyptus radiata) (U22) (see Section 5.1). Most subalpine woodland in the ACT is intact and in good condition. Areas subject to clearing for grazing have been confined primarily to the valley floors of the upper Gudgenby River, Tidbinbilla and Uriarra Forest. There has been little clearing of subalpine woodlands dominated by Snow Gum (Carron, 1985; Landsberg, 2000). Subalpine communities have been subject to changes in ecological processes (e.g. fire frequency) and disturbance (e.g. seasonal grazing, invasive plants and pest animals) that influence species composition. For instance, weed species associated with early pastoralism are found in grassy areas of the upper Cotter Catchment. Inappropriate fire regimes are a significant threat to these communities (see Section 1.2 and 5.1). Lowland woodlands in the ACT occur between 440 m and 1340 m above sea level and cover approximately 13 573 ha of the ACT (excluding secondary grasslands). They are broadly located in a north–south pattern along the hills and ridges that flank the urban and rural areas of the ACT. Eucalypt species dominate the canopy and the understorey is dominated by a range of shrubs, grasses, herbs and forbs. The most widespread lowland woodland communities in the ACT are those dominated by Blakely’s Red Gum / Yellow Box (u19) and Yellow Box / Apple Box (u178) (see Figure 1 and Section 5.1). Clearing for grazing and urban development has resulted in patches of lowland woodland of varying size and condition. While little is understood about the pre- European floristic composition of lowland woodlands, changes to natural disturbance regimes—including grazing—have reduced the height, cover, herbage mass and diversity of the grassy stratum, and dominant native grasses have, in many instances, been replaced by shorter, cool season, perennial native grasses or exotic grasses (Costin, 1954; McIntyre & Lavorel, 1994; Prober & Thiele, 1995; Stol & Prober, 2015). Ongoing management is required to mitigate the impacts of a range of threats to subalpine and lowland woodlands (outlined in Section 1.2)..
PART A 13 Figure 1: Distribution of woodland communities across the ACTDistribution of woodland communities across the ACT.
PART A ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY.
16 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Sticky Everlasting, Googong Dam (E. Cook).
PART A 17 PART A 1. PROTECT AND MANAGE WOODLAND AND COMPONENT SPECIES 1.1 RETAIN AND PROTECT NATIVE WOODLANDS The ACT contains some of the most intact woodlands in Australia, including the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. In terms of size, connectivity, diversity and habitat for threatened species, ACT’s woodlands are exceptional. Large patches of subalpine woodland persist across the south and south west of the ACT. The mean size of these woodland areas are over 25 ha and are often contiguous with other associated subalpine and alpine vegetation communities. Over 80% of lowland woodland patches are less than 10 ha in size. Nineteen patches of lowland woodland greater than 100 ha persist in the landscape (see Figure 2). More than half of these sites are likely to meet the definition of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland; others are degraded but retain small areas that meet the definition. Woodlands (including secondary grasslands) cover approximately 34% of the ACT’s land area; lowland and subalpine woodlands cover approximately 13% and 21% respectively. Detailed classification and mapping of vegetation in the ACT was completed in 2018 (see Section 4.7). This information has been used to describe and map the distribution of each woodland community by land tenure (see Table 1 and Figure 3). Approximately 70% of the extent of all woodland (including secondary grasslands) is protected within the ACT’s formal reserve system. Approximately 85% of this area is in the subalpine region of the ACT. Since the declaration of Namadgi National Park in 1984 and Tidbinbilla Reserve in the early 1960s, the extent of subalpine woodland protected in the ACT has remained stable. Today, approximately 98% of subalpine woodland extent is protected in reserves (see Table 1). In 2004, when the previous Lowland Woodland Strategy was developed, approximately 21% of lowland woodland (including secondary grasslands) was protected in reserves. Since then, an additional 1156 ha has been protected, including areas that contain Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. Today, approximately 29% of the total extent of lowland woodland is protected in reserves and 44% persists on rural lands (Table 2). The proportion of each lowland woodland community protected in reserves ranges from 23 - 100%. Lowland Snow Gum grassy woodland (u78), Red Box tall grass-shrub woodland (q6) and secondary grasslands have the lowest representation in the reserve system (23%, 20% and 26% of extent respectively)..
18 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Figure 2: Distribution of lowland woodland patches larger than 100 ha in the ACT Distribution of lowland woodland patches larger than 100 ha in the ACT.
PART A 19 Table 1: Woodland communities across land tenures in the ACT WOODLAND COMMUNITY* TOTAL EXTANT HECTARES RESERVE(i) (% OF TOTAL) OTHER CONSERVATION(i) (% OF TOTAL) RURAL LANDS(i) (% OF TOTAL) NATIONAL LAND (% OF TOTAL) OTHER(i) (% OF TOTAL) LOWLAND Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box (± White Box) tall grassy woodland (u19) 7196 2138 (30) 829 (11) 3129 (43) 621 (9) 477 (7) Yellow Box – Apple Box tall grassy woodland (u178) 4334 1289 (30) 251 (6) 2073 (47) 349 (8) 373 (9) Red Box tall grass-shrub woodlands (q6) 1776 359 (20) 317 (18) 709 (40) 335 (19) 57 (3) Ribbon Gum very tall woodland on alluvial soils along drainage lines (p520) 174 155 (89) 7 (4) 6 (3) - 6 (4) Snow Gum grassy mid-high woodland (u78) 90 21 (23) 3 (3) 61 (68) - 5 (6) TOTAL 13573 3963 (29) 1408 (10) 5978 (44) 1306 (10) 801 (7) SECONDARY GRASSLANDS 17868 4689 (26) 352 (2) 10813 (61) 1440 (8) 574 (3) SUBALPINE Snow Gum – Mountain Gum – Daviesia mimosoides tall dry grass-shrub subalpine open forest (u28) 18235 18077 (99) 72 (<1) 83 (<1) - 2 (<1) Snow Gum – Candlebark tall grassy woodland in frost hollows and gullies (u27) 14442 13533 (94) - 896 (6) - 12 (<1) Mountain Gum – Snow Gum ± Robertson’s Peppermint grass-forb very tall woodland to open forest (u22) 8054 8042 (100) 6 (<1) 6 (<1) - - Jounama Snow Gum – Snow Gum shrubby mid-high woodland on granitoids (u207) 4677 4677 (100) - - - - Black Sallee grass-herb woodland in drainage depressions and moist valley flats (u118) 2623 2563 (98) 8 (<1) 51 (2) - - Alpine Sallee shrub-grass subalpine mid-high woodland (u158) 378 378 (100) - - - - Snow Gum – Epacris breviflora – Leptospermum myrtifolium tall woodland to open forest of drainage depressions (u23) <1 <1 (100) - - - - TOTAL 48409 47272 (98) 86 (<1) 1037 (2) - 14 (<1) (i) Reserve: Nature Reserve, National Park. Other conservation: land managed to maintain the natural values of the area (including: urban open spaces, special purpose reserves, hills, ridges and buffers, and unleased areas managed as reserve). Rural lands: rural lease, unleased (grazing licence). Other: Forests, roads, unleased, SPR-Recreation and private leases. * A list of the full community name (as described by Armstrong et al. (2013)) is provided in 5.1..
20 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Figure 3: Distribution of lowland and subalpine woodland across tenures in the ACTDistribution of lowland and subalpine woodland across tenures in the ACT.
PART A 21 Formal protection of woodland, particularly the long- term conservation of remaining lowland woodland, facilitates functional connectivity, supports the maintenance of a diversity of slow-developing habitat features and supports the persistence of threatened woodland-dependent species. The ACT Government supports the protection of woodlands by gazetting additional land as reserves under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Nevertheless, realising the conservation goals outlined in this Strategy requires an ecosystem management approach that prioritises actions based on need, regardless of tenure. A range of ACT Government policies aim to protect and enhance the values of woodland outside of the reserve system (e.g. various legislative frameworks [outlined in (Section 4.6)], land use licences and approvals, and Land Management Agreements). This Strategy also identifies priorities and partnerships with a range of land managers (see for example Section 2) to effectively protect woodlands from a range of threats. A Cultural Heritage Management Framework is currently being developed to outline the principles, policies and procedures to manage Aboriginal places in partnership with Traditional Custodians (and in accordance with the Heritage Act 2004) within land managed by ACT Parks and Conservation Service. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES RETAIN AND PROTECT NATIVE WOODLANDS → →Ensure no net loss of the ecological and cultural values of woodlands in the ACT. → →Maintain or improve the proportion of each woodland community located within the ACT’s formal reserve system (see Table 1). → →Identify opportunities to improve representation of lowland Snow Gum woodland (u78) and Red Box tall grass- shrub woodland (q6) in the ACT’s formal reserve system. → →All species of woodland flora and fauna should be represented by viable, wild populations that will enable the species to be conserved for perpetuity. The ACT Government will continue to support regional and national effort towards the conservation of these species. → →Improve understanding of the distribution of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community in the ACT and aim to protect all remaining areas from unintended impacts (see Endangered YB-BRG Woodland action plan, Part B). → →Prioritise the protection and ongoing management of woodland that contributes to threatened species conservation (see action plans, Part B). 1.2 REDUCE THREATS TO NATIVE WOODLAND BIODIVERSITY Native woodlands and associated fauna across the ACT are subject to a range of impacts that threaten their condition, resilience and survival. Threatening processes include those that impact ecosystems at a regional scale (e.g. climate change) and those that are largely restricted to a single site (e.g. inappropriate grazing disturbance). These threats interact and where possible, should be managed as part of a combined strategy to maintain and enhance the viability of woodlands in the ACT. The extent and severity of threatening processes may differ between lowland and subalpine woodlands. URBANISATION Extensive areas of lowland woodland have been cleared across southeast Australia and many now exist as fragmented patches within a landscape of urban and rural development (see Section 4). The development and expansion of new suburbs will be the primary cause of future losses of woodland habitat in the ACT. Future suburbs to accommodate the growth of Canberra in the Molonglo Valley and Gungahlin have been subject to rigorous ACT and Commonwealth statutory environmental assessment processes and approvals to avoid, mitigate or offset the impacts of development on woodland habitats..
22 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY The ACT Planning Strategy 2018 outlines a strategic approach to investigate the potential for new residential areas to the west of the city to meet future housing need. A key action is to undertake environmental, infrastructure and planning studies for the western edge of the city (to identify suitable areas for a range of uses) (ACT Government, 2018a). Natural habitat and conservation areas are considered in the urban planning and design processes to promote habitat connectivity and support landscape resilience. Offset areas are also identified and established to offset any unavoidable impacts on the natural environment (ACT Government, 2018a). The western edge investigation area contains patches of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, and habitat for threatened birds and the vulnerable Pink-tailed Worm- lizard. Woodland patches in this area also have local and regional habitat connectivity value. While there is significant ecological value in retaining small woodland patches (Eldridge & Wong, 2005; Fischer & Lindenmayer, 2002), scattered and isolated remnant trees (Fischer et al., 2010; Le Roux et al., 2018; Manning et al., 2006; Stagoll et al., 2010), and urban green space (Ikin et al., 2013a; Stagoll et al., 2012), urban areas contain limited habitat structure that support woodland biodiversity (Le Roux et al., 2014b). Habitat features such as hollows, logs and litter are significantly reduced in urban greenspace compared with rural lands and nature reserves in the ACT (Le Roux et al., 2014b). The regeneration of trees in the urban context is also limited, and lower than in nature reserves (Le Roux et al., 2014a; Le Roux et al., 2014b). The canopy cover of mature trees has declined in urban areas since 2004; however, it has increased across rural lands and nature reserves during the same period (J. Botha 2018, pers. communication). Modelling suggests that while reserves will continue to provide a stable source of hollows, under existing management practices, the availability of hollow-bearing trees in the urban environment is likely to decline over time (Le Roux et al., 2014a). As part of goals to reduce urban heat and retain the natural attributes of our city, the ACT Government aims to achieve a 30% tree canopy cover (or equivalent) by 2045 (ACT Government, 2019a). The loss of mature native trees (including hollow bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment is listed as a key threatening process under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. The importance of mature and hollow-bearing trees is discussed in Section 1.3 (and in ACT Government (2018g)). Urban development also leads to further fragmentation of woodland, resulting in the loss of structural connectivity that supports landscape permeability for movement of species (see Section 1.3). The state of the landscape-scale urban-woodland matrix has significant impacts on the habitat features and species located in lowland woodland across the ACT. Disturbances to lowland woodlands is greatest proximal to urban areas. These may include: → →increased visitor access resulting in higher rates of removal of rocks and timber for firewood, trampling and other impacts from unmanaged access and activities, and damage to sites of Aboriginal and / or heritage value → →dumping of garden waste, rubble and other rubbish → →changes in nutrient inputs and soil properties → →spread of garden weeds and invasive plants (e.g. Cotoneaster [Cotoneaster spp.], Hawthorn [Crataegus monogyna]) and Firethorn [Pyracantha spp.]) → →invasion by aggressive or exotic birds that are prevalent in urban areas → →noise and light pollution → →interactions with native wildlife, including bird feeding (which may change the behaviour and composition of native birds and spread avian disease (Goddard et al., 2017; Jones & Reynolds, 2008)) and predation by domestic cats and dogs → →the need, in some cases, to undertake frequent fuel management activities within asset protection zones to reduce the risk of wildfire to human life and property. Urban development and low levels of vegetation across the agricultural landscape are likely to influence the composition of birds found within adjacent woodland patches (Ikin et al., 2014a; Ikin et al., 2014b). A number of woodland bird species, some which are declining in the region, avoid habitat that is in close proximity to the urban edge (e.g. Scarlet Robin and Striated Thornbill [Acanthiza lineata]). Other species are also impacted by the rate of urban encroachment (e.g. Brown Treecreeper) (Rayner et al., 2015a). With the development of new suburbs and the growth of Canberra’s population, pressure from recreational access is likely to increase. Potential visitor impacts are outlined in Section 2.2..
PART A 23 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF URBANISATION → →Mitigate impacts of existing urban development on adjacent woodland habitat, by: → →protecting, maintaining and improving habitat features across the urban landscape, including mature trees wherever appropriate → →supporting community-led stewardship of woodlands by facilitating education initiatives and fostering relationships with relevant organisations (including Bush on the Boundary community groups) to improve understanding of the value of woodland and threats to its survival (see Section 2) → →ongoing maintenance of access tracks, and visitor interpretation and other educational signage → →maintaining vigilance in detecting and eradicating newly emerged invasive plants. → →Mitigate impacts of future urban development on woodland areas by: → →assessing the woodland values in and surrounding identified potential future development areas to inform planning and conservation outcomes → →after feasible and appropriate avoidance and mitigation measures have been undertaken, support the identification, establishment and ongoing management of offset areas according to the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy or Commonwealth approved offset requirements (and associated documents) → →incorporating consideration of natural habitat and conservation areas into urban planning and design processes to promote habitat connectivity and support the establishment of biodiversity refuges → →ensuring buffer zones (including inner asset protection zones for bushfire management) are incorporated into the planned urban development area → →ensuring consideration is given to the impacts of urban development on neighbouring woodland and associated biodiversity during the planning and development process → →ensuring new residential areas developed in the vicinity of a woodland area with high conservation value, or threatened woodland fauna habitat, are declared cat containment areas. OVERGRAZING MACROPODS Macropods play a central role in grassy ecosystems, modifying their habitat through selective grazing and browsing. They influence herbage mass levels, which determines habitat suitability for a range of fauna species (see Section 1.3). The Eastern Grey Kangaroo is an iconic species often encountered by residents in the ACT. It is the dominant herbivore in grasslands and grassy woodlands, including the plains around Canberra and the foothills and lower elevation valleys of the western and southern ranges. Other macropods, including the swamp wallaby (Wallabia bicolor), are also widespread and common in suitable habitat. The abundance of kangaroos in subalpine areas (including Namadgi National Park and Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve) are regulated primarily by food supply and predation pressures (ACT Government, 2010a). These populations will remain unmanaged unless undesirable impacts are identified or specific ecological (or other) objectives require management intervention (ACT Government, 2017b). While grassy ecosystems in the ACT evolved under the influence of grazing macropods, densities of macropods in lowland areas have increased considerably since the 1960s (ACT Government, 2010a). Today, macropods exert high grazing pressure across a number of lowland reserves in the ACT (ACT Government, 2017b; McIntyre et al., 2010). Research illustrates that high grazing pressure from Eastern Grey Kangaroos can reduce plant species richness (Driscoll, 2017), simplify grass structure, increase the proportion of short vegetation, and reduce regeneration and herbage mass (Howland et al., 2014; McIntyre et al., 2015; Neave & Tanton, 1989; Stapleton et al., 2017; Vivian & Godfree, 2014). Heavily grazed sites are associated with a loss of topsoil and organic material and the exposure of bare ground. These sites are commonly associated with elevated soil loss and loss of nutrients (ACT Government, 2010a)..
24 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Sustained high grazing pressure from macropods also negatively impacts a range of fauna associated with grasslands and grassy woodlands in the ACT. For example, the abundance and diversity of beetles and reptile species at a site is impacted by kangaroo grazing pressure (Barton et al., 2011; Howland et al., 2014; Manning et al., 2013). Kangaroo grazing also influences the presence of a number of bird species reliant on grassy layers for foraging and / or nesting (Howland et al., 2016). Eastern Grey Kangaroos show a preference for new vegetation growth (Meers & Adams, 2003; Snape et al., 2018) and without intervention their populations in lowland woodlands are limited largely by the seasonal abundance of food. Maintaining a stable population of macropods, which is not limited by its food supply and exerts only a moderate level of grazing pressure, is important for the maintenance of plant species richness (Driscoll, 2017) and for the conservation of fauna that depend on a complex structure of understorey vegetation. LIVESTOCK Grazing by livestock can simplify understorey vegetation structure, age and size (including eliminating grazing- sensitive species and reducing native plant species richness), and negatively impact woodland-associated fauna assemblages (Barton et al., 2016; Dorrough et al., 2012; Dorrough et al., 2011; Lindsay & Cunningham, 2009; Morgan, 2015). Grazing by livestock can also negatively impact woodland vegetation by reducing the regeneration and recruitment potential of eucalypts (Sato et al., 2016) and changing the chemistry and condition of soils (Close et al., 2008; Yates & Hobbs, 2000). Soil compaction from livestock inhibits a plants ability to grow roots and thus to access adequate water and nutrients (Yates & Hobbs, 1997). Disturbance to the soil and increases in some soil nutrients can also facilitate the establishment of invasive plants (Close et al., 2008; Pettit et al., 1995). Furthermore, grazing pressure can prevent the movement and establishment of native, palatable species into an area. This is a significant issue to consider, as some species will need to move to new locations to persist within a changing climate (Morgan, 2015). The impacts of grazing by livestock are dependent on the frequency, duration, intensity and timing of grazing (Barton et al., 2016; Kay et al., 2017; McIvor et al., 2011; Stol & Prober, 2015), site-level factors (e.g. fertilisation history, exotic plant competition, microsite conditions) and the climate (Dorrough et al., 2011; Prober & Wiehl, 2011). Kangaroos grazing, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons) Kangaroos grazing, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons).
PART A 25 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF OVERGRAZING→ → Manage macropod densities according to the Controlled Native Species Management Plan for Eastern Grey Kangaroos (ACT Government, 2017b), the Kangaroo Management Plan (ACT Government, 2010a), and other subsidiary documents. → →Continue the trial of dart-delivered GonaCon on kangaroos in Canberra Nature Park (CNP) and continue to assess the long-term effectiveness of dart-delivered GonaCon on fecundity. Ensure future culling programs are informed by the outcomes of this program. → →Undertake activities, including restoration and herbage mass management techniques, to maintain, wherever possible: → →a heterogeneous mosaic of grazing intensity by native herbivores → →at least some pasture that is at a level palatable macropods and other native herbivores. → →Continue long-term monitoring of the interaction between vegetation and principal herbivores in grasslands and grassy woodlands to inform ongoing management. → →Consider actions to enhance woody debris (including fine woody components) to reduce browsing pressure in woodland areas where naturally occurring debris is deficient (see: Stapleton et al. (2017)). → →Work with rural landholders to support the maintenance and enhancement of woodland values, including protection from overgrazing (as outlined in Section 2.1). → →Reduce the impact of overgrazing from non-native herbivores according to ACT Government (2012a). INAPPROPRIATE FIRE REGIMES Fire is a critical component of a functioning woodland as it influences soil properties, vegetation structure and the regeneration of some plant species (Prober et al., 2008; Stol & Prober, 2015). Fire regimes are characterised by the season, frequency and intensity of burning. Inappropriate fire regimes can negatively impact ecosystem processes, plant communities and fauna habitat (Driscoll et al., 2010). Fire season has the potential to change fire behaviour due to varied temperature and moisture conditions. Fire will also impact flora and fauna species in different ways when occurring at different stages of their life cycles. Frequent fires can simplify woodland ecosystems by: limiting regeneration opportunities, eliminating fire- sensitive species, and damaging groundlayer and other habitat features (e.g. tree hollows in subalpine woodlands (Salmona et al., 2018)). Midstorey vegetation cover can also increase in woodlands that are burned too frequently (Dixon et al., 2018b; Foster et al., 2017) or too infrequently (Close et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2018). If fire is too infrequent, plant species diversity in lowland systems may also decline (Penman et al., 2011). Research suggests high intensity fires can damage belowground systems and simplify lowland woodland vegetation structure (Foster et al., 2017; Neary et al., 1999). The loss of young trees and seedlings to high intensity fire limits recruitment and creates a more homogenous stand age structure. The loss of mature trees can increase midstorey regeneration and fire fuel loads in lowland systems (Wilson et al., 2018), and decrease habitat availability and diversity in subalpine woodlands and forests (e.g. destroying tree hollows) (Salmona et al., 2018). Tolerable fire intervals (TFIs) describe an inter-fire interval, between which plant species have optimum time to regenerate between fires. The minimum TFI defines the minimum interval between successive fires that allows species to either regenerate from seed or for resprouters to become fire tolerant, prior to the next fire. The maximum TFI defines the maximum fire-free interval before those species that require fire for regeneration, decline with age and die. Thus, prescribed TFIs define the optimum period within which fire should occur to maintain species diversity and minimize species loss..
26 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY In January 2003, wildfires burnt 70% (164 914 ha) of the ACT, including pine plantations, rural lands and extensive areas of woodland. The majority of subalpine woodland communities were burnt during these fires and are now below prescribed minimum TFIs (see Section 5.1). Consequently, extensive areas of subalpine woodland currently support young, regenerating vegetation. Conversely, significant areas of lowland woodland remained unburned during the 2003 wildfires and are currently above their prescribed maximum TFI (see Section 5.1). Fuel reduction activities – including slashing, grazing and prescribed burning – are undertaken to mitigate the impacts of large-scale wildfire and to maintain and/or improve the health of woodlands (and other ecosystems) in the ACT. The ACT Government prepares annual Bushfire Operations Plans (BOPs) that guide the implementation of annual fuel management activities. These plans adopt current best practice management techniques and consider ecological knowledge to establish prescribed minimum and maximum TFIs of vegetation. Where the fire requirements of threatened species are known, annual BOPs also recommend fire management activities that aim to maintain or enhance conditions for these species (see action plans, Part B). Also included in the BOPs are areas identified for cultural burning, to be planned and implemented in collaboration with Traditional Custodians (see Section 2.1). Prescribed burning, Hall Cemetery There is limited, but growing knowledge available to inform fire management in subalpine woodlands. Recent research projects provide some insight into the dynamics of fuel loads and the response of fauna and flora to fire. Fuel loads in subalpine woodland are lowest for the first few years directly after fire. However, as subalpine woodland (and other forest ecosystems) mature, they become less flammable than those burnt frequently (Zylstra, 2018). Fuel increases until between 6 and 12 years after fire and then, in the following decades begins to decline (Dixon et al., 2018b). In some areas of the ACT, long unburned (>96 years old) subalpine woodlands have fuel loads comparable with those areas burned recently in this ecosystem (Dixon et al., 2018b). Land managers should consider this information when planning fuel suppression efforts, as frequent burning is likely to lead to an increase in shrubby understorey and thus, flammability (Dixon et al., 2018b; Zylstra, 2013). There is evidence that long unburned subalpine woodland is disproportionately more important for mammal richness (K. Dixon 2018, pers. communication), and reptile richness and abundance (Dixon et al., 2018a) than recently burned sites. Less than 8% of subalpine woodland and forest in Namadgi National Park remains long unburned (>96 years old) (Dixon et al., 2018b) and many areas of subalpine woodland in the ACT have burnt within the last 20 years (ACT Government data, unpublished). While supporting strategic prescribed burning in subalpine woodlands, the ACT Government aims to protect patches of long unburned subalpine woodland. Prescribed burning, Hall Cemetery Box 2: Burning subalpine woodlands to reduce the risk of wildfire.
PART A 27 Using fire to conserve woodland-associated biodiversity in the ACT is challenging. The specific responses of most fauna and flora to different fire regimes are unknown (see Box 2). Where lowland woodlands are in close proximity to urban areas, ACT land managers must strike the right balance between reducing fuel loads to protect human life and property, and undertaking ecological burning to maintain and enhance biodiversity. Trade-offs are also required in subalpine areas where prescribed burning of corridors is required to slow the spread of unplanned fires. There is also a risk that prescribed burning can result in adverse ecological impacts, such as the collapse and loss of mature, hollow-bearing trees (see discussion in Bluff (2016)). Furthermore, invasive plant species can become established following disturbance from fire (e.g. Cootamundra Wattle [Acacia baileyana] and a range of exotic annuals) (Stol & Prober, 2015). Future challenges for fire management in a changing climate are discussed below. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF INAPPROPRIATE FIRE REGIMES → →Undertake strategic prescribed burning and other fuel reduction activities within woodlands to protect human life and property, maintain species diversity and minimise species’ losses according to the ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plan (ACT Government, 2019). → →Use the best available ecological knowledge to evaluate and make decisions regarding balancing asset protection and woodland biodiversity conservation. → →As part of planning for prescribed burning, take appropriate measures to mitigate potential negative ecological impacts. → →Lead and support research to improve our understanding of the responses of fauna and flora to different fire regimes in the ACT. → →Facilitate and support cross-tenure fire management planning and activities (including with rural landholders and NSW land managers). → →Where it is consistent with objectives to reduce the risk to human life and property, increase the diversity of subalpine woodland post fire age classes. Priority activities include: → →protecting areas of long unburned subalpine woodlands from fire for the foreseeable future → →identifying areas of subalpine woodland to transition to older post-fire age classes. → →Develop weed management strategies for fire management when there is a likelihood of invasive species responding positively to burning (e.g. English Broom [Cytisus scoparius], African Lovegrass [Eragrostis curvula], Cootamundra Wattle, Oxeye Daisy [Leucanthemum vulgare] and Nodding Thistle [Carduus nutans]). → →Facilitate community education initiatives to improve understanding of the complexities of fire management in the ACT and the use of fire to manage woodland biodiversity. → →Undertake robust monitoring and evaluation to assess the ecological (and human life and property protection) outcomes of planned fire management activities (See Section 3) and unplanned fire events. → →In accordance with ACT Government (2015a), protect cultural sites during fire management activities and work in collaboration with Traditional Custodians and the broader Aboriginal community to plan, implement and monitor cultural burns in woodlands (see Section 2.1)..
28 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY INVASIVE PLANTS The spread and infestation of invasive plants are threatening processes that can impact the ecological and cultural values of woodlands across the ACT. Exotic plants can change the structure and function of woodlands (e.g. by altering fire regimes) and can cause a decline in native species (e.g. Yates and Hobbs (1997) and Faithfull (2012)). Furthermore, when large stands of exotic plants establish as thickets or extensive grassy monocultures, they act to further fragment the landscape (Godfree et al., 2017). Invasion of subalpine and lowland grassy systems by invasive plants is often driven by resource availability and is commonly associated with disturbance (Faithfull, 2012; Johnston & Pickering, 2001; Leigh et al., 1987; McIntyre & Lavorel, 1994). Invasive species found in subalpine woodlands are primarily associated with anthropogenic disturbance such as roadsides, paths and infrastructure. In the ACT, invasive plants are more abundant, diverse and widespread in lowland woodlands than subalpine woodlands (S. Taylor 2018, pers. communication). Lowland woodlands have been subject to a range of historical disturbances (Landsberg, 2000) and the high edge-to-area ratio of many patches increases their susceptibility to plant invasion (Saunders et al., 1991). Some exotic plants, including Pinus sp. (wildlings from former and existing pine plantations) and blackberry (Rubus fruticosus), are currently being managed in both lowland and subalpine woodland patches. A number of native species, not local to the ACT, pose a current threat to woodlands (primarily within the urban-woodland matrix). The most common species include shrubs (e.g. Cootamundra Wattle, Black Wattle [Acacia decurrens], Streaked Wattle [Acacia lineata] and Rosemary Grevillea [Grevillea rosmarinifolia]) and creepers (e.g. WA Bluebell Creeper [Billardiera heterophylla]). Annual grasses, forbs and shrubs are the most common weeds in lowland and subalpine woodlands (see Table 2). Several of these species are identified as Weeds of National Significance (WONS) (see the Commonwealth Government Environment website). Exotic grasses currently pose the biggest threat to woodlands in the ACT. A number of species, including African Lovegrass and Chilean Needle Grass (Nassella neesiana), have become so abundant and widespread in lowland woodlands that eradication is not feasible. Some woodland areas have become so highly degraded and dominated by invasive species that they act as novel ecosystems. Indeed, some species of woody weeds (e.g. blackberry) in woodlands of poor condition provide valuable habitat for native animals, particularly birds (Stagoll et al., 2010). The indirect impact on biodiversity of removing these weeds must be considered during control and follow up activities. Other potential non- target impacts of weed control may result from weed spraying and subsequent colonisation of other invasive species following removal. There are a number of invasive plants that are not yet established in the ACT but have the potential to cause significant damage to woodlands. For example, Coolatai Grass (Hyparrhenia hirta), which can significantly impact the diversity of woodland ground cover (McArdle et al., 2004), was recently discovered in the ACT (and swiftly treated). People, vehicles, animals and machinery pose a significant biosecurity threat to woodland (particularly subalpine woodland) values through the potential introduction of invasive plants (and pathogens). Many invasive plants have a long lag time before they establish at a site. Thus prevention, and early detection and treatment, is essential to effectively and efficiently manage the impacts of plant invasions (Hobbs & Humphries, 1995). The ACT Government is on high alert to detect and eradicate several emerging species outlined in Table 2. Spraying African Lovegrass, Mt Taylor Nature Reserve Spraying African Lovegrass, Mt Taylor Nature Reserve.
PART A 29 Table 2: Invasive plants present in woodlands in the ACT (WONS are bolded) PRIORITY SPECIES FOR CONTROL EMERGING SPECIES COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME WOODLAND ASSOCIATION COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME WOODLAND ASSOCIATION African Lovegrass Eragrostis curvula Lowland and Subalpine Bridal Creeper Asparagus asparagoides Lowland Blackberry Rubus fruticosus Lowland and Subalpine Chilean Needle Grass Nassella neesiana Subalpine Chilean Needle Grass Nassella neesiana Lowland Coolatai Grass Hyparrhenia hirta Lowland and Subalpine Cootamundra Wattle Acacia baileyana Lowland Fireweed Senecio madagascariensis Lowland English Broom Cytisus scoparius Subalpine Mexican Feather Grass Nassella tenuissima Lowland and Subalpine Nodding Thistle Carduus nutans subsp. nutans Subalpine Mouse-ear Hawkweed Hieracium pilosella Subalpine Pine Pinus radiata / Pinus sylvestris Lowland and Subalpine Orange Hawkweed Hieracium aurantiacum Subalpine Serrated Tussock Nassella trichotoma Lowland and Subalpine Ox-eye Daisy Leucanthemum vulgare Subalpine St John’s Wort hypericum perforatum Lowland and Subalpine Spanish Heath Erica lusitanica Lowland Sweet Briar Rosa rubiginosa Subalpine Whiskey Grass Andropogon virginicus Lowland Sweet Vernal Grass Anthoxanthum odoratum Subalpine Garden escape woody weeds (various) Lowland.
30 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF INVASIVE PLANTS → →Manage established invasive species according to the ACT Weeds Strategy 2009 -2019 (ACT Government, 2009) (note, a revised ACT Weeds Strategy is currently in development) and annual Invasive Plants Operations Plans. → →Prevent costly, erratic invasive plant control by ensuring long term, regular funding for targeted management. → →Reduce the likelihood of new plant invasions by prioritising management activities that prevent the introduction of invasive species, and rapidly detect and efficiently eradicate emerging species. Activities include: → →responding promptly to outbreaks of emerging species and ensuring rigorous follow up control → →continue to engage the community in reporting weed sightings and infestations through Canberra Nature Map and the Collector Application → →identify additional strategies to: → →enhance community education regarding the threat and identification of invasive species (using a variety of media platforms) → →expand community education regarding the biosecurity risk people and vehicles pose to woodland values, and appropriate hygiene measures to reduce the likelihood of species being unintentionally introduced → →enhance knowledge sharing between community members and land managers, including the ACT Government. → →Where eradication of a species is not feasible, prioritise management actions to protect significant cultural and ecological assets from further invasion. → →When required, undertake staged removal of woody weeds and plan and implement revegetation (e.g. with fast growing native shrubs) to maintain critical habitat for fauna in the absence of complex habitat structure. → →Facilitate and support cross-tenure management of invasive plants where relevant. → →As part of control programs, monitor the indirect impacts of invasive plant control, and changes in the abundance of invasive plants and their impacts on woodlands. → →Continue to use and promote digital technologies to assist in the systematic recording of invasive species distribution and control activities and use this information to monitor changes in the area and density of infestations. → →Keep up to date with new control methods and emerging technologies to inform best practice invasive plant species management. PEST ANIMALS Pest animals cause damage to native species associated with woodland ecosystems in the ACT. Pest species include the European Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus), European Red Fox (Vulpes vulpes), feral cat (Felis catus), feral pig (Sus scrofa), feral horses (Equus caballus), Indian Myna (Acridotheres tristis), European Wasp (Vespula Germanica), Honey Bee (Apis mellifera) and several species of deer. Threats posed by pest animals do not occur in isolation; the impact of multiple pest species often interact with each other and with a range of other threatening processes that exert pressure on native biodiversity (e.g. fire, grazing and habitat fragmentation) (Molsher et al., 2017; Williams et al., 1995). The Australian Government lists competition and land degradation caused by European Rabbits as a key threatening process (Commonwealth Government, 2011c). European Rabbits negatively impact ecosystems by disturbing the soil, preventing the regeneration of vegetation, ringbarking trees, promoting weed invasion and competing with native mammals for resources (Commonwealth Government, 2011c; Leigh et al., 1987; Williams et al., 1995; Wimbush & Forrester, 1988). Rabbits are widespread across a range of ecosystems and altitudinal gradients in the ACT. Leigh et al. (1987) found that rabbits in the subalpine woodlands in the ACT increase the risk of erosion and reduce the cover and diversity of forbs..
PART A 31 Deer can damage soils and reduce the abundance of native plants by rubbing against and damaging trees, trampling and eating saplings (Commonwealth Government, 2011b) and wallowing within and around the edges of waterbodies. Three species of deer have been recorded in woodlands and other ecosystems in the ACT. Fallow Deer (Dama dama) and Red Deer (Cervus elaphus) have scattered populations across a range of ecosystems in the ACT. Sambar Deer (Rusa unicolor) are an emerging threat in the ACT. Most sightings of Sambar Deer have been within Namadgi National Park. Monitoring by the ACT Government indicates they have had little impact on vegetation structure and composition to date (Mulvaney et al., 2017). Predation by the European Red Fox and feral cat are both listed as key threatening processes by the Australian Government (Commonwealth Government, 2008, 2015b). Feral cats prey on a range of birds, reptiles and mammals and have been implicated in the widespread decline of native fauna across the country (Dickman, 1996). Predation by foxes is also believed to have contributed significantly to the decline of native animals in Australia (Commonwealth Government, 2011a). Both cats and foxes threaten the survival and persistence of woodland fauna in the ACT. Domestic cats in Canberra show a preference for mammals, but also kill a range of native birds, reptiles and amphibians (Barratt, 1997). The Australian Government lists predation, habitat degradation, competition and disease transmission by feral pigs as a key threatening process (Commonwealth Government, 2017). Pigs can alter soil structure, nutrient cycles and water quality, and can alter plant species composition, including the distribution of weeds (Commonwealth Government, 2017). There are resident populations of pigs across the ACT. They are most likely to have an ongoing impact within subalpine ecosystems, including woodlands, which neighbour bogs, wetland areas and creeks. Feral horses can cause soil compaction, erosion, damage to vegetation, introduction of weeds and damage to water bodies (Commonwealth Government, 2011d). While horses are abundant in Kosciusko National Park bordering the ACT, they are now largely absent from the ACT. The risk of incursions into the ACT (i.e. Namadgi National Park) is high and is likely to change in response to control activities undertaken in NSW. Incursions into Namadgi National Park are monitored and controlled as required. Box 3: Dingoes (Canis lupus), a controlled native species Dingoes (Canis lupus) have functioned as a higher order predator in Australian ecosystems for approximately 4 000 years. They prey on a range of small, medium and large animals and may help suppress introduced species such as the European Red Fox, feral cat, feral goats and the European Rabbit (Corbett & Newsome, 1987). In the ACT, Dingoes show some hybridisation with domestic dogs and, due to their impact on sheep, are considered a pest by graziers (ACT Government, 2012a; Claridge et al., 2009). They are currently controlled in areas adjoining rural properties to protect livestock, however in core areas of Namadgi National Park they are protected. Indian Mynas are aggressive and may outcompete native animals for food and limited habitat features such as hollows. In the ACT they are most commonly found in urban areas, along the edges of woodland reserves, and within nature reserves with low densities of trees (Grarock et al., 2014; Pell & Tidemann, 1997). Recent data analysis undertaken by the Canberra Ornithologists Group (COG) indicates that the number of Indian Mynas in the ACT is no longer increasing (Bounds et al., 2010). Community-led culling is likely to have played a role in reducing populations at a local level (Grarock et al., 2014). Aggressive exclusion of native birds from potential woodland and forest habitat by over-abundant Noisy Miners (Manorina melanocephala) is listed as a key threatening process by the Australian Government (Threatened Species Scientific Committee, 2013). Noisy Miners have been implicated in the reduction of abundance and diversity of native birds within woodlands (Bennett et al., 2015; Dow, 1977; Grey et al., 1997; Taylor et al., 2008). The pressure exerted on native fauna is exacerbated by fragmentation and is most pronounced in the most productive areas (Bennett et al., 2015; Montague-Drake et al., 2011; Oldland et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2008). Analysis of woodland bird data by COG indicates that the number of Noisy Miners in the ACT is increasing (Bounds et al., 2010; Canberra Ornithologist Group, 2018)..
32 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY In addition to being a social nuisance, European Wasps may impact woodland and other ecosystems by preying on and competing with native invertebrates (Kenis et al., 2009). European Wasps are found throughout the ACT, including the most remote areas of Namadgi National Park. Competition from feral Honey Bees is listed as a key threatening process by the NSW Government (NSW Government, 2002). Honey Bees compete with native species for tree hollows and flora resources (NSW Government, 2002). Many woodland-associated birds (including the Superb Parrot) are dependent on tree hollows and may be affected by competition for hollows from European Wasps and Honey Bees. In addition, other hollow-dependent fauna, including Sugar Gliders (Petaurus breviceps), Brushtail Possums (Trichosurus vulpecula), Greater Gliders (Petauroides volans) and Yellow-bellied Gliders (Petaurus australis), may also be affected by European Wasps and Honey Bees. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES CONTROL PEST ANIMALS → →Prevent costly, erratic pest animal control by ensuring long-term, regular funding for targeted pest management, according to the ACT Pest Animal Strategy 2012-2022 (ACT Government, 2012a). → →Reduce the impact of pest animals by prioritising management activities that detect and efficiently manage emerging pest species. Activities include: → →responding promptly to emerging pest species and ensuring rigorous follow-up control (see ACT Pest Animal Strategy 2012-2022 (ACT Government, 2012a) and ACT Biosecurity Strategy 2016-2026 (ACT Government, 2016a)) → →identifying additional strategies to expand community education regarding the threats and identification of pest animals → →enhancing knowledge sharing between community members and land managers, including the ACT Government. → →Where eradication of a species is not feasible, prioritise management actions to protect significant cultural and ecological assets from further impacts. → →Facilitate and support cross-tenure management of pest animals. → →Consider the interactions between ecosystem processes, threatening processes and management activities during the development and implementation of control programs. → →Lead and support research to improve our understanding of the relationship between pest animal abundance/ density and environmental impacts. Based on research findings, develop management actions that target actual, rather than perceived, impacts. → →For all control programs, develop and maintain a robust monitoring program to track changes in the abundance of pest animals and the impact they cause to woodland values. → →Develop management triggers for the control of pest animals that are informed by both the abundance of an animal and its environmental impact. → →Facilitate community education and participation in pest animal management to maintain community support for pest animal control and to improve efficiencies of control work through cross-tenure management. → →Lead and support research to identify and test innovative control methods and emerging technologies in the space of pest animal control to inform best-practice management. → →Maintain local, regional and national research collaborations (including the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions)..
PART A 33 DIEBACK Dieback refers to the long-term decline in the health of trees, often leading to death. Symptoms of dieback include thinning of the canopy, regeneration of the crown from epicormic shoots, reduction in growth rate, increase in dead branches, and other symptoms of stress that may render the trees more susceptible to damage from insects and disease. The primary drivers of Eucalyptus dieback are usually fungal pathogens (Ciesla & Donaubauer, 1994; Jurskis & Turner, 2002; Scott et al., 2009) or high rates of defoliation by insects (Edwards et al., 1993; Gherlenda et al., 2016; Hall et al., 2015; Lowman & Heatwole, 1987; Ross & Brack, 2015; Steinbauer et al., 2015; Stone & Bacon, 1994; Wardell-Johnson et al., 2005). A number of research projects link insect outbreaks to changes in weather and water stress (Clark, 1962; Clark & Dallwitz, 1974; White, 1969). Whether dieback is related to an increased susceptibility of trees to these drivers, and the potential reasons for this, is less well understood. Researchers have postulated that nutrient enrichment of woodland systems through pasture improvement has played a significant role in dieback on rural lands (Landsberg et al., 1990). Other suggested causes include fewer low intensity fires (Jurskis & Turner, 2002), higher rainfall and / or water logging (Gherlenda et al., 2016; Hall et al., 2015), climate change and plant stress due to changed soil conditions (Jurskis & Turner, 2002), and increased pest mobility associated with urbanisation (Hall et al., 2015). Dieback is becoming an increasing threat to trees and associated flora and fauna in woodlands in the ACT and more broadly. For example, across the Monaro region of NSW, approximately 2000 km2 of woodland is affected by dieback. The decline in condition, particularly of Ribbon Gum (Eucalyptus viminalis), is consistent across all land use types and has no relationship with fire regime or habitat complexity (Ross & Brack, 2015). Within the ACT, dieback has been described across all age classes and land tenures. It is most common in Eucalyptus trees across the lowlands (e.g. Blakely’s Red Gum [Eucalyptus blakelyi] and Apple Box [E. bridgesiana]). However, it also has been noted in a number of species that occur in subalpine communities including Snow Gum (E. pauciflora), Ribbon Gum, and Candlebark (E. rubida). Blakey’s Red Gum, a key component of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community, is particularly susceptible to dieback (Cowood et al., 2018). Blakely’s Red Gum, Isaac Ridge Blakely’s Red Gum, Isaac Ridge.
34 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY In the ACT, affected trees show signs of foliar damage from insect herbivory, especially psyllids (Cardiaspina albitextura and Lasiopsylla rotundipennis) and the scarab beetle (Anoplognathus spp.). Dieback of Ribbon Gum and Apple Box noted in the southern regions of the ACT appears to be correlated with the presence of the native weevil (Gonipterus spp.). Preliminary analyses indicate fungal pathogens (Phytopthora spp.) are present in ACT woodlands, but further investigation is required to confirm their contribution to dieback in the ACT (ACT Government, 2017 unpublished data). The cause (or interacting factors) leading to an increase in the abundance of psyllids or the scarab beetle that may cause dieback in the ACT is not known. Similarly, limited information is available to identify causative factors of eucalypt susceptibility to insect attacks (or other drivers) that cause dieback. However, recent modelling indicates that the change in condition (as a measure of dieback) of Blakely’s Red Gum and lowland box gum grassy woodland (u178 and u19) between 2004 and 2017 was influenced by a range of habitat (e.g. soil characteristics and water table height), climate (e.g. seasonal precipitation) and cohort (e.g. tree canopy density) variables (Cowood et al., 2018). Specifically, declining condition of lowland box gum grassy woodland is associated with elevated maximum temperatures during the warmest month of the year and high rainfall in the wettest month. Poor condition is also correlated with fewer fires since 1900 and with increasing distance between trees. The overall condition of trees on rural land is higher than on reserve land (Cowood et al., 2018). It is important to note that the health of trees in lowland woodland changes from year to year, and the relationship between condition and variables also changes. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MITIGATE THE IMPACTS OF DIEBACK → →Continue to lead and support research and modelling to improve our understanding of the relationship between dieback and: → →fire (including prescribed burning) → →the abundance and impact of insects and fungal pathogens → →soil moisture and condition → →vegetation density → →land use. This will require the collection of additional field data. → →Building on the work undertaken by Cowood et al. (2018), continue to map tree canopies using remote sensing methods and undertake associated modelling and analysis to track changes in the condition of trees in lowland woodland communities (e.g. Blakely’s Red Gum, Yellow Box [Eucalyptus melliodora] and Apple Box) over time. Expand modelling and analysis to include subalpine woodland species (e.g. Snow Gum, Ribbon Gum and Candlebark). → →Lead and support research to improve our understanding of the susceptibility of individual Eucalyptus trees to dieback (including investigations into genetic variability and seed provenance trials [see Section 4]). → →Undertake and support restoration activities that enhance a system’s resilience to climate change and other disturbances (see Section 1.3), and encourage regeneration and establishment of Eucalyptus trees. → →Management actions that aim to mitigate the impacts of dieback are informed by emerging ideas and research undertaken in the ACT and in Eucalyptus woodland communities across Australia..
PART A 35 CLIMATE CHANGE Over the past 60 years Australia has experienced a shift in rainfall patterns, a warming climate, and rising sea levels (Timbal et al., 2015). With continued emissions of greenhouse gas, changes to the climate are likely to continue. Future projections for the ACT and the broader region (i.e. the ‘Murray Basin Cluster’, identified in Timbal et al. (2015)) include: warmer temperatures (including an increase in the average mean temperature and the number of extremely hot days), a reduction in snowfall and fewer frost days, an increase in the occurrence and duration of extreme drought, an increase in the number of severe fire danger days, and a reduction in cool-season rain (and high variability of warm-season rainfall) (Timbal et al., 2015). These changes will alter the structure and floristic composition of woodlands in the ACT and likely compromise their function and resilience. While changes to lowland and subalpine woodlands are inevitable, understanding these changes will help us develop realistic and achievable goals, and prioritise and implement strategies to maintain biodiversity. Overall plant productivity and the persistence of some species across the landscape will be limited by changes in the availability of soil moisture (Prober et al., 2014b; Timbal et al., 2015). Warming temperatures are likely to impact the life history strategies of some species (Timbal et al., 2015), including a number of threatened lowland woodland species (see Wilson et al. (2016)). The future climatic suitability of the local area for some species may also change. For instance, climate refugia modelling undertaken by the ACT Government predicts the persistence of Snow Gum at lower elevations is at risk, however, there will continue to be suitable climate conditions at high elevations (Mackenzie et al., 2018). Modelling also suggests there will continue to be climatically suitable habitat for a number of other common subalpine woodland canopy and midstorey species (including Mountain Gum (Eucalyptus dalrympleana), Candlebark, Black Sallee (E.stellulata) and Daviesia mimosoides) in the near (2020-2039) and far (2060 -2079) future (Mackenzie et al., 2018). The climate suitability of areas across the ACT in the near or far future is predicted to remain stable for many common lowland woodland canopy species in the ACT, including Blakely’s Red Gum, Yellow Box, Apple Box and Ribbon Gum (Mackenzie et al., 2018). The climate suitability for many common midstorey and understorey species in lowland woodland is also likely to be maintained in the near future. The local climate is predicted to become increasingly unsuitable for some species associated with woodlands. For instance, the persistence of Themeda triandra is likely to be confined to small refuges in the ACT (Mackenzie et al., 2018). Increasing temperatures and changes to concentrations of atmospheric CO2 are likely to impact both lowland and subalpine woodland plant species in different ways, and thus alter the composition of woodland communities (Hovenden & Williams, 2010; Jarrad et al., 2009; Prober et al., 2012a). Increased CO2 leading to increased growth rates and improved water use efficiency of woody plants may also result in denser midstorey and canopies (Hovenden & Williams, 2010; Prober et al., 2012a). However, some woodland species (including the Snow Gum), may experience increased susceptibility to damage from frosts when grown at higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations (Lutze et al., 1998). Research suggests warming and drying conditions are likely to change the availability of soil nutrients in subalpine systems (White-Monsant et al., 2015). Furthermore, the effects of climate change will interact with, and potentially exacerbate the impacts of other threatening processes, such as fire, fragmentation and invasive plants (and animals). The impacts of climate change are also a potential cause of widespread Eucalypt dieback (see Dieback discussion above). The increased growth of woody vegetation in grassy woodlands could result in changes to fuel loads and the response of woodland communities to different fire intervals and intensity. Lack of habitat connectivity across the landscape is likely to impede the successful migration and adaptation of native species to changed environmental conditions. In particular, poor dispersers (e.g. native perennial herbs) and those species that lack long-lived seed banks will have limited capacity to recover after extreme climatic events and to otherwise distribute to climatically suitable areas (Prober et al., 2012a). These species may require assistance to colonize new areas (see McIntyre (2011)). As habitat becomes unsuitable for native species and disturbance events increase, the encroachment and establishment of invasive plant species are likely to increase and further compromise the resilience of woodland vegetation under new conditions (Prober et al.
, 2012a)..
36 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Changes in local temperatures are likely to impact the physiology and development of a number of fauna species (Hughes & Westoby, 1994). As woodland vegetation structure, function and resources change, the suitability of current habitat for some woodland- associated fauna species will also decline. For instance, the availability and nutritional content of food for herbivores (i.e. leaf nitrogen concentrations and secondary metabolites) is likely to be lower with higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations (Hovenden & Williams, 2010). A lack of connectivity across the landscape will impede the migration of fauna species to habitat with suitable nesting, food and shelter. Fauna species most at risk include those with a long time to maturity, poor mobility, narrow ranges, specific host relationships, isolated and specialised species, and those with large home ranges (Hughes & Westoby, 1994).Yellow Box at Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons) Yellow Box at Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons).
PART A 37 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE → →Improve understanding of: → →the predicted impacts of climate change on woodland-associated fauna and flora → →future climate refugia for woodland communities and potential colonisation sites for associated biodiversity → →which species are likely to require assistance to migrate to suitable areas and how translocations could be used to ensure the survival of populations of species → →changes in the invasion potential of high-risk invasive plants → →changes to woodland soil condition with drying conditions. → →Identify management priorities and protect sites identified as significant refugia (and potential colonisation sites) for woodland species. → →As outlined in Section 1.3, woodland restoration activities will consider future climate impacts and will aim to enhance a system’s ability to adapt to changing conditions. → →Collaborate with local, regional, state and federal stakeholders to undertake research, management activities, and facilitate community awareness raising and knowledge sharing between all parties. → →Monitor the long-term response of species (that are characteristic of woodland communities) to climate change. Use monitoring data to inform the selection of thresholds above or below which management actions should be triggered. 1.3 ENHANCE RESILIENCE, ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION AND HABITAT CONNECTIVITY Stol and Prober (2015) describe high quality box- gum grassy woodland as having effective ecological processes, a diverse ground-layer with patches of shrubs, a range of tree sizes (with an open canopy), and hollows, fallen timber, and vegetation structure that provides habitat for fauna. Across eastern Australia, few lowland grassy woodlands are of high quality; they are frequently in poor to moderate ecological condition. To enhance the resilience, function and overall condition of woodland across the ACT, restoration works must aim to maintain (or improve) a range of habitat features. Maintaining heterogeneous understorey structure and intermediate herbage mass are critical components of the restoration of our lowland woodland systems. Habitat connectivity is also a critical consideration in ensuring the long-term resilience and function of woodland and associated biodiversity. MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE WOODLAND CONDITION The most important consideration in seeking to enhance the function of woodland ecosystems is to maintain the extent, integrity and habitat features of existing woodland in the ACT. Where woodland areas are in an altered, but relatively good condition, removing the source of degradation, and thus facilitating natural regeneration, can be effective (Standards Reference Group, 2017). In low quality sites, activities to assist natural regeneration (e.g. planting, pest animal control, and introducing habitat features) may be required. Principles guiding the maintenance and improvement of woodland condition in the ACT are derived primarily from research undertaken in lowland woodlands of the region. Little research has been undertaken to inform this work in subalpine woodlands. Natural regeneration is often more cost effective than planting, and typically results in the establishment of healthy plants, well-adapted to site-specific conditions (Rawlings et al., 2010; Spooner et al., 2002). Research indicates that vegetation within restoration sites are genetically poorer than remnant trees and thus may not be able to adapt to environmental change as well as sites with natural regeneration (Broadhurst, 2013). Remnant vegetation also provides important habitat for fauna that plantings may not provide for many years (Lindenmayer et al., 2016)..
38 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Large, mature trees enhance critical ecosystem functions (e.g. carbon storage and water production) (Keith et al., 2017), and also encourage movement of fauna, which facilitates pollination and seed dispersal of woodland vegetation (Doerr et al., 2014a). They provide breeding, roosting and foraging habitat that smaller trees or artificial structures may not provide (Ikin et al., 2013b; Le Roux et al., 2016b; Le Roux et al., 2015, 2018) and are a critical source of leaf litter (McElhinny et al., 2010), seed for recruitment (Vesk et al., 2008), and fallen debris (Killey et al., 2010). Coarse woody debris takes a long time to accumulate and significantly influences the function of woodland ecosystems (Manning et al., 2007). Coarse woody debris may help protect understorey plants from moisture loss, and play a role in enhancing plant growth and cover in woodlands (Goldin & Brookhouse, 2015). It may also improve soil nutrition (Goldin & Hutchinson, 2013) and facilitate natural regeneration by reducing browsing pressure in grassy systems (Stapleton et al., 2017). Research also indicates coarse woody debris plays a role in enhancing overall soil microbial diversity (Hamonts et al., 2017), maintaining beetle diversity (Barton et al., 2009) and increasing reptile abundance (Manning et al., 2013). Research from the Mulligans Flat-Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment has been instrumental in guiding the scale and placement of coarse woody debris to enhance the function of woodland ecosystems across the ACT. Maintaining other key habitat features such as mistletoe (see Ikin et al. (2014b); Watson (2002)) and a variable ground cover (Snape et al., 2018) is also critical to maintain woodland ecosystem function. Fallen timber, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons)Fallen timber, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons) Fallen timber, Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons).
PART A 39 Plantings and other assisted natural regeneration activities are important for the restoration of woodland sites with compromised ecosystem function (e.g. see Box 4). For instance, undertaking plantings is necessary for the restoration of lowland woodland sites with poor natural regeneration (due, at least in part, to past grazing and associated soil enrichment) (Dorrough et al., 2012; Dorrough et al., 2011; Spooner et al., 2002; Windsor, 2000). In some instances, revegetation may also enhance the resistance of some systems to invasion by exotic plants (Prober & Lunt, 2009). Successful revegetation of some woodland areas support fauna assemblages otherwise absent from a system (Ikin et al., 2014b) and can support higher fauna species diversity when plants of different ages are established (Lindenmayer et al., 2016). Enhancing the diversity of flora at some woodland sites is likely to require the addition of seed, as well as the management of biomass and competition (Johnson et al., 2018). High-density regeneration or plantings can reduce the growth rate of woodland trees; this delays the creation of large boughs, tree hollows and fallen timber (Killey et al., 2010; Vesk et al., 2008). Recent modelling also suggests that management actions must be tailored to specific areas, for example different systems may require planting and / or thinning of vegetation (as well as efforts to enhance germination and recruitment) to create optimal stand densities (see Gibbons et al. (2010)). The management of site level threats such as grazing pressure (Manning et al., 2013; Stapleton et al., 2017), inappropriate fire regimes and exotic plant invasion (Yates & Hobbs, 1997), is critical to facilitate natural regeneration and / or ensure the success of restoration activities. In some cases, this requires an improved understanding of the impacts of these threats to biodiversity and the mechanisms that enhance a system’s resilience to them. Processes operating at the landscape scale that threaten the success of restoration activities, such as weather and natural events (Hagger et al., 2018), dieback, vegetation clearing and climate change, must also be considered. The functioning of soil microbial communities is responsive to the quality and quantity of organic matter input by plants (Hamonts et al., 2017), and thus disturbance that threatens woodland plant communities is likely to have a major negative impact on soil microbial communities. Soil communities, including fungi and bacteria, are a critical ecosystem resource; they are an essential component of plant nutrient uptake systems and food webs of many animals (Tommerup & Bougher, 2000). A number of woodland plants, including the threatened Tarengo Leek Orchid and Canberra Spider Orchid, are reliant on associations with mycorrhizal fungi for successful reproduction and the provision of adequate nutrients (see Part B). Given the direct link between soil communities and above ground plant communities (Hamonts et al., 2017), restoration of woodland is likely to be improved by an enhanced understanding of belowground community and trophic relationships (Kardol & Wardle, 2010)..
40 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Box 4: Barrer Hill restoration project In 2014 the ACT Government commenced the Barrer Hill restoration project. The project aims to restore a 50 ha former pine plantation back to a box-gum grassy woodland community. To date, works have included: → →Planting of over 50,000 native trees, shrubs, grasses and wildflowers as habitat and a vital movement corridor for wildlife → →Placement of 80 tonnes of salvaged rock to extend and enhance habitat for the pink-tailed worm-lizard → →Placement of over 1000 tonnes of salvaged coarse woody debris to enhance groundstorey condition and provide habitat for declining woodland birds and other fauna species → →Construction of three forb enhancement sites to enhance groundstorey diversity → →Installation of 10 vertical habitat structures to mimic habitat functions of mature trees → →Installation of a habitat sculpture designed to create a living artwork that engages the public and provides critical habitat, including natural hollows, peeling bark and perch sites Before and after of forb enhancement site Barrer Hill and the surrounding area has also been the site of several research programs (Hannan et al., 2019; McDougall et al., 2016; Smith et al., 2018). The site now serves as an outdoor laboratory where students and the community can see and learn about restoration practices first hand. (a) (b) Vertical habitat sculpture (a) and tree plantings and coarse woody debris placement (b)Before and afterVertical habitat sculpturetree plantings and coarse woody debris placement.
PART A 41 Changing climatic conditions pose challenges for the success and sustainability of restoration efforts. Species that are unable to adapt or evolve to new environmental conditions as fast as the climate changes will rely on dispersal to more suitable areas to persist in the future. Hence, maintaining and increasing connectivity of woodlands at a local and regional scale will support species to persist, and is critical to ensure the long-term resilience of woodland. Sites with a poor ground layer condition, including nutrient depleted topsoil, exhibit characteristics that are likely to exacerbate the impacts of a drying climate (Prober et al., 2014a). Restoration efforts to improve ground layer and vegetation-soil water feedback, including water infiltration and retention, will enhance the resilience of these systems to increased moisture stress (Prober et al., 2014b). Sourcing non- local seed may enhance the potential for revegetation areas to adapt to a changing climate by incorporating a broader gene pool that may be adapted to different climatic conditions (e.g. genotypes sourced from drier areas) (Prober et al., 2012b; Prober et al., 2015). The ACT Government is undertaking an investigation into biodiversity refugia and, in collaboration with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), a seed provenance trial (see Section 4); these projects will inform restoration projects under predicted climate change. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE HABITAT FEATURES AND HABITAT HETEROGENEITY → →Enforce policy and undertake management action to retain large, mature trees and other critical woodland habitat features (e.g. mistletoe) across all tenures. → →Undertake plantings and introduce habitat elements to restore soil health, increase woodland extent, enhance functional woodland connectivity and enhance habitat for target fauna species. → →The prioritisation and planning of restoration projects should: → →define site and landscape-scale goals → →evaluate the appropriateness and cost-effectiveness of assisted natural regeneration to meet objectives otherwise addressed through revegetation and other active regeneration activities → →be informed by the best available knowledge of the local system and the most appropriate management techniques → →consider the best available science regarding the future implications of climate change → →consider the likely impacts of past land use practices on the success of intervention → →create opportunities to partner with community groups, including Traditional Custodians, local landholders and research organisations (see Section 3) → →consider how landscape-scale restoration is best achieved across multiple tenures (e.g. control measures coordinated with adjoining tenures) → →consider opportunities to enhance connectivity through improved habitat quality (see below) → →consider the habitat and resource requirements of threatened species. → →Work closely with rural landholders and other local land managers to plan and undertake restoration activities to maintain and improve habitat features and contribute to landscape-scale restoration, as outlined in Section 2.1. → →Ensure long term funding for ongoing management and / or monitoring of restoration sites. → →Continue to support the work of community groups (see Section 2), and undertake and support research that informs restoration activities (see Section 3.1 and 4.8). → →If there is conflict between habitat management for two or more threatened species, consideration must be given to abundance, habitat specialisation, functional traits, mobility, adaptability and the ACT and National conservation status of the species. The nature of ongoing threats, and how important the site is to the conservation of the species must also be considered..
42 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY → →Seek to improve our understanding of aboveground-belowground linkages to inform effective restoration techniques. This includes: → →knowledge of species-specific symbiotic relationships → →management actions that are advantageous to soil communities and soil community structure → →potential for re-establishing mutualistic species relationships through direct introduction of soil organisms. IMPLEMENT ECOLOGIC ALLY APPROPRIATE HERBAGE MASS MANAGEMENT Native grasses and forbs play an essential role in maintaining the structure and function of grassy systems and provide important resources for a range of fauna species associated with woodland. Principles guiding the implementation of ecologically appropriate herbage mass management in woodland in the ACT are derived primarily from research in the lowland woodlands of the region. The natural processes that influence herbage mass levels are usually disrupted in modified vegetation communities and, as a result, herbage mass levels can become too high, too low, or too homogeneous to support a diverse flora and / or fauna community (ACT Government, 2017a). In open lowland woodlands that have not been subject to disturbance such as grazing, fire or slashing, tussock grasses grow large and can create a dense floor canopy and increase overall biomass. The spaces between grass tussocks are important for the establishment of native forbs (Morgan, 1998); thus with increasing herbage mass, plant diversity often declines. As time since disturbance increases, dead leaf matter also accumulates and can smother native grasses; this may facilitate exotic species establishing in the system (Morgan, 2015). Furthermore, if grasses are left to grow long, they are no longer a preferred food resource for native herbivores such as macropods (Snape et al., 2018), which changes the dynamic between herbage mass and natural control agents in the system. Ideally, grazing pressures from native herbivores contribute to the creation and maintenance of intermediate herbage mass and heterogeneous understorey structure (e.g. average grass height, grass height variability and the proportion of bare ground). However, many lowland woodland patches in the ACT are highly modified and fragmented and are subject to high levels of grazing by macropods (and non-native herbivores such as rabbits). This leads to lower herbage mass and increased homogeneity of understorey structure (see discussion above). A change in plant species composition through invasion by non-native plants can also substantially change the herbage mass and structure of grassy systems (ACT Government, 2017a). The need for active herbage mass management at a lowland woodland site depends on a range of site- specific factors (e.g. species composition, productivity, time since last disturbance and grazing pressure) and climatic conditions. Where native herbivores are unable to maintain the desired herbage mass and structure, there are a number of tools available to manage herbage mass in woodlands including fire management, manipulation of grazing regimes (including stock and macropods), mowing and slashing. Each technique has a different effect on herbage mass and biodiversity. The history of disturbance and past management practices at a site is likely to influence the response of woodland communities to different herbage mass management techniques applied today (Stol & Prober, 2015) and thus it is an important consideration when implementing a disturbance regime. Additional considerations as part of planning the implementation of herbage mass management are outlined below. Fire removes herbage mass of dominant grasses (providing space for the establishment of less competitive species) and promotes flowering of some species (Morgan, 2015). The influence fire has on species diversity is, at least in part, determined by the fire history (Stol & Prober, 2015) and the productivity of a site (i.e. fire maintains or increases plant diversity in highly productive Themeda grasslands) (Lunt et al., 2012). Other considerations for implementing fire as a tool for herbage mass reduction include the: frequency and intensity of burning (and the likely impacts on the life-cycle of understorey species), season and weather conditions, topography, presence and sensitivity of rare and threatened species, risk of weed establishment and erosion following burning, and the proximity to urban or other built assets..
PART A 43 Grazing removes herbage mass of palatable understorey species. In lowland woodlands research indicates that where heavy grazing by Eastern Grey Kangaroos leads to low herbage mass, a reduction in the density of Eastern Grey Kangaroos will recover herbage mass (McIntyre et al., 2015). Other restoration activities, including the addition of coarse woody debris, will also support the recovery of herbage mass (McIntyre et al., 2015). The impact stock grazing has on plant species diversity is, at least in part, determined by the grazing history of a site. While there is some evidence that pulse grazing can reduce the abundance of exotic annual grasses (Cole et al., 2016), there is no consensus on its use to enhance biodiversity or its effectiveness in reducing fire severity in some woodland systems (Williamson et al., 2014). However, stock grazing may effectively manage herbage mass (without negatively impacting plant species diversity) at lowland woodland sites with a history of grazing, and where grazing intolerant species have already been excluded (leaving palatable grazing-tolerant species) (McIntyre et al., 2015; Morgan, 2015). In lowland woodland sites containing abundant exotic annuals, strategic grazing may be useful to deplete the cover of exotic annuals and promote native perennials (Lunt, 2005). Other considerations for introducing stock grazing as a tool for herbage mass management include: frequency, duration and timing of grazing, recent rainfall, stocking rates, quarantine procedures (to reduce the introduction of exotic plants), presence of rare and threatened species, palatability of desirable and undesirable understorey species, and the need and ability to control stock movements at a site (see discussion in Stol and Prober (2015), Morgan (2015) and Lunt (2005)). When burning or grazing are not viable options to manage herbage mass, slashing and mowing can be considered to remove some of the bulk of grasses in lowland woodlands. This can be a particularly useful tool to manage herbage mass for non-conservation purposes in urban reserves. Different species respond differently to slashing and many are sensitive to regular slashing (Morgan, 2015). Other considerations for using slashing and mowing to manage herbage mass in woodlands include: timing (i.e. avoiding active growing, flowering and seeding season), frequency, removal of clippings, the risk of introducing exotic plants, height of slashing, the presence of rare and threatened species, and the size of the area where management intervention is required (see discussion in Stol and Prober (2015) and Morgan (2015)).Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra), Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons) Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra), Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons).
44 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MANAGE HERBAGE MASS → →In the absence of knowledge regarding species-specific understorey habitat requirements, aim to maintain intermediate levels of herbage mass and a heterogeneous (or ‘patchy’) grassland structure at the reserve and / or landscape scale. → →Evaluate the risk and appropriateness of implementing different herbage mass techniques (fire, grazing or slashing / mowing) at a site, and compare with the risk of inaction. → →Develop ACT Government guidelines for the management of herbage mass within lowland woodlands. Consistent with the Grassland Herbage Mass Management Guidelines; this will include a process for making decisions at a site, which considers: → →understorey thresholds and requirements for species associated with, or dependant on understorey habitat → →the historic land use and management at a site → →the maintenance and / or enhancement of habitat for threatened species and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland → →the prescriptions and priorities of existing conservation management plans for the area. → →Manage macropods densities (according to the guidelines outlined above) at sites where heavy macropod grazing is resulting in a substantial decline in herbage mass and structural heterogeneity. → →Undertake and support research and ongoing monitoring to evaluate the ecological, social and economic outcomes of controlled grazing by native herbivores and livestock. → →If there is conflict between herbage mass management for two or more threatened species, consideration must be given to abundance, habitat specialisation, functional traits, mobility, adaptability and the ACT and national conservation status of the species. The nature of ongoing threats, and how important the site is to the conservation of the species must also be considered. → →Livestock grazing for conservation purposes should only be used to manage herbage mass on ACT Government managed land where the following criteria are met: → →native herbivore populations are unable to maintain the desired herbage mass and structure → →other herbage mass management techniques are deemed too hazardous or otherwise not appropriate → →the site is outside of a reserve / is not of high quality within a reserve → →the site has a history of grazing and palatable, grazing tolerant species account for a large proportion of the understorey herbage mass → →stock movement can be controlled and fertilisers or exotic pastures are not required to maintain animal health → →the site has not been identified as potential habitat for an understorey threatened species (that is sensitive to grazing pressure) or as climatic refugia for any significant woodland-associated species..
PART A 45 ENHANCE HABITAT CONNECTIVITY Fragmentation of woodland can have complex effects on remnant vegetation (including a reduction in plant diversity) (Ramalho et al., 2014) and can reduce structural connectivity that facilitates the dispersal of plants and animals across the landscape. This reduces population gene flow, which increases inbreeding and reduces genetic variability; this can ultimately reduce the viability of plant and animal populations (Amos et al., 2014; Doerr et al., 2014a). Importantly, small, isolated populations with low genetic variability will be less able to adapt to new conditions under a changing climate. Improving habitat connectivity improves population viability by allowing small populations to interact and function as larger, more resilient populations. Connecting woodland patches through the development and maintenance of woodland corridors or isolated ‘stepping stone’ trees facilitates dispersal of fauna to locations with more favourable climatic conditions and critical habitat resources, and assists pollen dispersal (Doerr et al., 2014a). However, a species’ ability to effectively disperse and persist in the landscape is also influenced by factors such as its dispersal mode and efficiency (Amos et al., 2014), habitat condition (Schutz & Driscoll, 2008) and overall habitat loss across the landscape (Mortelliti et al., 2010). Efforts to improve landscape connectivity for particular species could be ineffective if these factors are not considered in restoration initiatives. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES ENHANCE HABITAT CONNECTIVITY → →Projects aiming to maintain or enhance connectivity should: → →prioritise the protection and effective management of woodland patches → →identify target species, and consider their requirements for functional connectivity → →consider habitat connectivity at both a local and landscape scale (within reserves and outside of reserves) → →consider links between woodland patches and between woodland and other ecosystems across the landscape (e.g. grassland, forest, riparian communities) → →link large patches of habitat as a first priority → →be informed by the best available local and regional connectivity models. → →assess the value and regional context of habitat patches (see Barrett and Love (2012) and Love et al. (2015)). → →Maintain isolated trees on and off reserve as ‘stepping stone’ connectivity, especially when revegetation is not feasible. → →Ensure the key east – west and north – south wildlife corridors across the ACT are maintained and where required, restored. → →Work with rural landholders and other land managers to improve connectivity of woodland habitat at a landscape scale..
46 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 2. COLLABORATE WITH THE COMMUNITY Meaningful collaboration between the ACT Government and various stakeholders including rural landholders, community members and groups, Traditional Custodians and research institutions will enhance our ability to mitigate current threats to native woodlands in the ACT (see Objective 2). Sharing resources, information and skills between all interest groups will provide the best opportunity to protect and manage woodlands into the future. Collaboration with the community should be based on the premise that no single agency or group holds all the information to successfully manage woodlands. Knowledge held by interest groups and the broader ACT community can and should contribute to the conservation of woodlands in the ACT as we have a mutual obligation to look after our environment. 2.1 PROMOTE COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN WOODLAND CONSERVATION COLLABORATE WITH RURAL LANDHOLDERS Lowland woodland or grassland once covered much of the area now designated as rural land. Today, more than 40% of lowland woodland remains on rural land across the ACT. Recent research illustrates the importance of maintaining a diversity of woodland habitat features as part of the rural landscape. Management activities including revegetation, fencing remnant and regrowth vegetation, reducing grazing pressure, retaining old trees and controlling invasive species, are effective in improving woodland habitat for biodiversity within agricultural areas (Briggs et al., 2008; Ikin et al., 2015; Kay et al., 2013; Lindenmayer et al., 2016; Spooner et al., 2002; Tulloch et al., 2016). Maintaining even small patches of remnant woodland vegetation such as scattered trees, can benefit a range of taxa including invertebrates (Le Roux et al., 2018; Ng et al., 2018), reptiles and frogs (Pulsford et al., 2018; Pulsford et al., 2017), woodland birds (Fischer & Lindenmayer, 2002; Le Roux et al., 2018; Rayner et al., 2014) and bats (Le Roux et al., 2018; Reid & Landsberg, 2000). Maintaining scattered trees can also improve soil conditions (Barnes et al., 2009; Barnes et al., 2011) and may benefit production in a range of other ways, including providing shelter and shade for livestock (Reid & Landsberg, 2000). To contribute to a whole of landscape approach to woodland conservation, the ACT Government aims to support rural landholders to undertake conservation and sustainable agricultural practices on their properties. Land Management Agreements, required under the Planning and Development Act 2007, are administered by the ACT Government and aim to establish a cooperative management regime that supports the objectives of both the lessee and the ACT Government. They provide a tool that the ACT Government can use to work together with landholders to manage woodland vegetation to preserve its conservation value, retain or enhance the condition of remnant woodland and preserve populations of threatened species. In 2018, the ACT Government received funding from the Australian Government to implement a five-year collaborative project to enhance and connect woodland in the ACT. Working across the landscape, the ACT Government will join with Greening Australia and Molonglo Conservation Group to facilitate a range of activities with rural landholders and community groups. Specifically, funding will support rural landholders to develop a detailed understanding of the conservation values of their properties, and to plan and implement a range of activities to maintain or enhance these values. These include but are not limited to: revegetation and other rehabilitation activities, strategic grazing of restoration areas (including fencing and incentive payments to offset stock exclusion), management of large paddock trees, threat management, and advice on improving land management practices. Ongoing opportunities for landholders to manage or improve the condition of their land, as well as its production and conservation value, exist through programs such as the ACT Environment Grants (ACT Government funded), ACT Rural Grants program (supported under the National Landcare Program), and other grant schemes administered by the ACT Government. These on-ground incentives are supported by community groups (such as Friends of Grasslands [FOG] and Greening Australia) and catchment groups..
PART A 47 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES COLLABORATE WITH RURAL LANDHOLDERS → →Work closely with rural landholders and their representative body, the Rural Landholders Association (RLA), to identify additional strategies to collaborate on projects and support landholders to protect and / or enhance woodland values on rural land. In identifying priority locations for collaboration with rural landholders, consideration should be given to: → →the presence of lowland snow gum woodland (u78), red box tall grass-shrub woodland (q6) and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland → →the connectivity value of woodland on the property (e.g. property is adjacent to a reserve or it has landscape connectivity value) → →known biodiversity value of the property (e.g. records of threatened or woodland-dependant birds) → →potential for restoration activities to enhance the biodiversity values of the property → →willingness of landholder to implement and maintain management recommendations. Priority activities include: → →maintaining remnant vegetation were possible, in particular, the maintenance of regeneration, large old trees and scattered trees → →maintaining a diversity of habitat features across the rural landscape, including woody debris, vegetation cover, leaf litter and rocks → →planting and maintaining stands of native woodland species → →targeting the protection and enhancement of lowland snow gum woodland (u78), red box tall grass-shrub woodland (q6) and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland → →controlling invasive plants → →restoration projects that contribute to improved landscape-scale connectivity (see Objective 3) → →monitoring results of management activities to inform future management. → →To effectively work with rural landholders, consideration must be given to: → →the diversity of priorities rural landholders have regarding the management of their properties, including the need to manage for production and profitability → →mechanisms to maintain open communication and effective relationships, including ensuring appropriate levels of on-ground staff to support initiatives → →prioritising work on properties that have high biodiversity value and / or significant potential to mitigate landscape scale threats. Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box tall grassy woodland (u19) on a Rural property Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box tall grassy woodland (u19) on a Rural property.
48 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY SUPPORT COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND RAISE COMMUNITY AWARENESS There are many community groups (and conservation organisations) interested and active in woodland conservation in the ACT, including: → →Bush on the Boundary → →Canberra Ornithologists Group → →Capital Woodland and Wetlands Conservation Trust → →Conservation Council → →Friends of Grasslands → →Grassy Woodland Stakeholder Group → →Greening Australia → →Kosciuszko to Coast → →Molongolo, Ginninderra and Southern ACT Catchment Groups → →National Parks Association of the ACT → →Parkcare and Landcare Groups. These groups are instrumental in advocating for native woodland conservation, undertaking management, monitoring and restoration projects, and raising public awareness of the values and threats to woodlands in the ACT (see Box 5). The knowledge held by the members of these groups and the work they undertake is critical to the ongoing conservation of woodlands in the ACT (see Section 4.7 for an outline of projects undertaken since the previous Strategy). Seeking to work collaboratively with community groups will improve community ownership of woodland protection and enhance the value of projects. Community members who participate in on-ground activities with others who are knowledgeable and passionate about woodland conservation develop emotional connections to woodlands and may develop feelings of stewardship over areas. While the benefits to woodland conservation from work undertaken by community members are significant, participants are also likely to experience physical, mental and social health benefits, including developing positive relationships with like-minded people (Townsend, 2006). Around 3% of ACT residents are currently engaged in volunteering within the reserve system and an additional 13-20% have expressed interest in becoming a volunteer (MARS, 2017). There is significant opportunity to raise the awareness of woodland values and conservation by engaging with community members, particularly young people and residents at the urban-reserve interface, who are not actively involved in its protection. Education initiatives with this broader community group may lead to an increased perceived value of woodlands and participation in conservation activities or other behavioural changes that reduce the ongoing threats to woodlands (e.g. improved vigilance in managing domestic plants and animals).Parkcare activity, Mt Taylor Parkcare activity, Mt Taylor.
PART A 49 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES SUPPORT COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND RAISE COMMUNITY AWARENESS → →Collaborate with community groups to deliver woodland conservation activities (e.g. restoration activities) to address the priorities outlined in this Strategy. → →Support community groups to undertake on-ground and other projects through the provision of grants, advice and access to research and other knowledge. Agreements between the ACT Government and community groups to undertake shared management of sites may also be considered. → →Provide opportunities for community members to engage in volunteer activities, through for example the ParkCare program. Training and access to other ACT Government resources is critical to ensuring the sustainability of the ParkCare program and other volunteer activities as they are identified. → →Facilitate, and collaborate with external groups to deliver community education programs that engage the broader community. Priority topics include: → →the value of lowland and subalpine woodlands, including the conservation significance of box-gum woodlands in the ACT and the threats to these values → →the implications of climate change on woodland biodiversity → →opportunities for community members to support the conservation of woodland biodiversity through management of residential risks and participation in volunteer opportunities → →the management priorities and challenges of effective woodland conservation in the ACT (e.g. native species control and balancing multiple priorities such as fire risk, biodiversity and community amenity within lowland woodland reserves) → →promoting the use of grassy woodland species in residential plantings → →disseminating the outcomes of relevant research and the outcomes and achievements of community activities. → →Facilitate information and knowledge sharing between ACT Government staff, research institutions and community groups to encourage best practice management of woodlands through, for example: → →workshops and seminars → →on-ground activities → →training opportunities → →online resources (e.g. ACTMAPi and ACT Government – Environment website) → →presentations → →production of educational resources and user-friendly publications. → →Develop and maintain appropriate interpretative signage and other educational materials in reserves and other open spaces..
50 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Box 5: Collaborative management of Stirling Park In 2009, FOG entered a contractual agreement with the National Capital Authority to undertake collaborative management of Stirling Park woodland (and nearby Yarramundi Reach and Scrivener’s Hut). Stirling Park is 52 ha of woodland reserved by the Commonwealth Government and managed by the National Capital Authority. It includes Endangered YB-BRG Woodland and a large population of the endangered Button Wrinklewort (Rutidosis leptorhynchoides). It is also of cultural significance to Traditional Custodians as it forms part of a ceremonial pathway and contains a number of recorded Aboriginal places. A Conservation Management Plan was developed in 2009 (Sharp, 2009) and was reviewed and updated in 2016 (Sharp, 2016). Together with a number of stakeholder groups (including traditional knowledge holders, Greening Australia, Yarralumla Residents Association and Molonglo Catchment Group), FOG has improved the condition of Stirling Park through on-ground management work including revegetation, fire management, and control and mapping of invasive plants. Collaborative management across Stirling Park and a neighbouring woodland property (managed by the ACT Government) has enhanced the local connectivity of woodland habitat in the area. FOG continues to play an advocacy role to ensure the protection of the site and to encourage its dedication to nature conservation. Stirling Park (M. Jekabsons) Stirling Park (M. Jekabsons) ENHANCE AND PROMOTE CITIZEN SCIENCE Monitoring and research activities undertaken by community members and organised groups make a significant contribution to our knowledge of woodlands; the breadth of data gathered by these groups is unattainable by research institutions and the ACT Government alone. Groups such as COG have long term monitoring projects that contribute large amounts of data to our shared understanding of woodland biodiversity (see Box 7). Resources developed by community groups (such as the Vegwatch Manual) provide guidance to community members to undertake monitoring using a consistent methodology. New technologies enable community groups to collect data with accuracy and precision. Parkcare and other groups use GIS mapping tools to record and report on management issues such as invasive plants and pest animals. Canberra Nature Map, and the corresponding NatureMapr Application, allows community members to report the location of plants, fungi, animals, insects and fish species that they observe across the Canberra region. NatureMapr is very popular and public submissions have vastly improved the understanding of the distribution of threatened and uncommon species (including the identification of new populations of rare plants), allowed early intervention against high risk early invader environmental weeds (following records of new weed outbreaks) and has contributed to an increased public awareness of the flora and fauna of the ACT region..
PART A 51 As with other community-led on-ground environmental projects, citizen science projects do not simply achieve environmental outcomes. As the participants and breadth of citizen science activities continue to expand, there is also significant opportunity for these projects to contribute to the broader community understanding of the threats to and values of woodlands across the ACT. Citizen science projects can also benefit the community through educational outcomes, increased awareness of environmental issues and changes in behaviour of community members (Roetman et al., 2014). CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES ENHANCE AND PROMOTE CITIZEN SCIENCE → →Explore opportunities for citizen science initiatives to meet conservation objectives outlined in this Strategy. Provide support to relevant community groups to plan projects and implement them. → →Encourage the systematic collection and effective use of data collected through citizen science projects by: → →supporting the management and use of digital information tools (e.g. ACTMapi and Canberra Nature Map / NatureMapr Application) → →ensuring data collected is subject to appropriate quality control (e.g. through expert screening of data and developing and disseminating data collection protocols) → →supporting community groups to access grants, professional and technical advice, training and equipment. ENHANCE THE PARTICIPATION OF ABORIGINAL PEOPLE While Traditional Custodians no longer rely on traditional resources found throughout the landscape for survival, retaining a connection to traditional lands remains important in defining and maintaining cultural identity. This includes accessing the landscape for cultural and social purposes (e.g. ceremonies, gatherings, fishing, cooking, healing, resource collection and knowledge transfer) and protecting significant places and features of the landscape from threatening processes (see Box 6). Traditional Custodians of the Canberra region view all Aboriginal places and objects as an important part of their history and want to ensure their appropriate maintenance and protection. The ACT Parks and Conservation Service, including Aboriginal staff, work to improve participation of Traditional Custodians in identifying the traditional uses and values of the land, and to plan for, and manage the cultural landscape according to contemporary Aboriginal aspirations. The ACT Government is currently working together with Traditional Custodians to establish the Traditional Custodians Caring for Country Committee. This Committee will support the integration of cultural knowledge in the management of Country and will provide support to ACT Government staff (within the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate) to engage effectively and appropriately with Traditional Custodians. Aboriginal staff work in various roles across the ACT Parks and Conservation Service and come together as the Murumbung Yurung Murra Rangers. The Murumbung Rangers aim to better involve Traditional Custodians in identifying the traditional uses, values and connections to fire, land and water and to capture the contemporary aspirations for management of the cultural landscape. The Murumbung Rangers also provide invaluable peer support, mentoring and advocacy within the Parks and Conservation Service and support the Representative Aboriginal Organisations and Traditional Custodians in the protection and interpretation of heritage sites for the enrichment of future generations. Through the Murumbung Ranger program, and in collaboration with Traditional Custodians, the ACT Government aims to facilitate Aboriginal cultural burning practices to meet objectives defined by Traditional Custodians. Staff work with Traditional Custodians to undertake cultural burns and associated land management treatments in areas (identified in annual BOPs) to meet a range of objectives. These may include the encouragement of bush tucker, production of fibre for weaving, or the maintenance of a desirable vegetation structure. By accessing Country for land management treatments, Traditional Custodians are provided an opportunity to maintain connections to Country and access a range of resources including bark, medicines and other materials. The primary purpose of facilitating cultural burns is cultural renewal, however they may also complement ecological and / or hazard reduction objectives or the protection of culturally significant sites..
52 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Box 6: Impacts on Aboriginal cultural sites within woodlands Cultural sites include sites that have physical remains or are significant to Aboriginal people due to their connection with traditional stories. Sites, regardless of whether physical remains exist, are afforded the same level of protection and priority for management. A range of land management issues and natural processes threaten the integrity of cultural sites throughout the ACT region. For example, weeds can cause the decline of native plant species, including traditional food resources, provide fuel for fire and reduce access to important places. Significant sites and objects are threatened by inappropriate fire regimes and disturbance caused by nearby development or management activities. Rock art sites are also threatened by natural processes such as intrusion by native vegetation, growth of lichen / moss, nesting invertebrates such as termites and wasps, and erosion from wind and water runoff. Community groups (including the Mullangang Traditional Aboriginal Landcare Group) and the ACT Government are working to maintain and restore these sites and the surrounding areas. Aboriginal rock shelter, Namadgi National ParkAboriginal rock shelter, Namadgi National Park.
PART A 53 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES ENHANCE PARTICIPATION OF ABORIGINAL PEOPLE → →Work in collaboration with Aboriginal community members to manage and monitor woodlands and fill knowledge gaps regarding their long-term conservation. Initiatives may include: → →employment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in a broad range of natural resource management roles → →planning, implementing and monitoring of cultural burns → →planning and / or implementing the maintenance of cultural sites in accordance with the Cultural Heritage Management Framework (in development) and the Heritage Act 2004. → →Support Traditional Custodians to access and use the landscape in accordance with Aboriginal Access to Country Cultural Guidelines (in development). Wherever possible, and with the permission and support of Traditional Custodians, collaborative activities should: → →provide opportunities for two way knowledge sharing between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people → →facilitate the rediscovery of cultural knowledge, including Indigenous Ecological Knowledge (IEK) → →facilitate the adoption of IEK in the management of woodlands. → →Implement and / or collaborate with RAOs and other community groups to deliver activities that: → →improve broad community understanding of the cultural significance and traditional responsibilities for caring for lowland and upland woodlands. Strategies include formalising Aboriginal place names and reserve interpretation that features language and cultural knowledge → →facilitate Traditional Custodians to access woodlands and reconnecting with Country → →support Aboriginal people to gain employment and training relevant to the conservation of woodland and other ecosystems in the ACT → →identify and map cultural values of woodlands and develop appropriate management actions → →facilitate two way knowledge sharing between natural resource managers and researchers, and Aboriginal people → →identify opportunities to assist Aboriginal people to rediscover and adopt IEK in woodland conservation. 2.2. SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE RECREATIONAL USE OF WOODLANDS Woodland reserves offer Canberra residents and tourists a range of recreation opportunities, including walking, running, bird and wildflower appreciation, orienteering, rogaining, cycling and mountain biking, dog walking, horse riding and geocaching. The proximity of CNP to residential areas facilitates regular access by community members and thus encourages many Canberra residents to maintain a healthy lifestyle. The number of visitors to woodland areas within CNP is steadily increasing. Areas containing subalpine woodland, including Namadgi National Park and Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve, also have a steady flow of visitors, although at lower rates than lowland woodland within CNP (MARS, 2017). Community members who regularly access woodland areas for recreation are likely to feel a sense of ownership over areas. As different users are likely to value different aspects of the reserves they access, engaging with a wide section of interest groups through reserve visitation provides a great opportunity to broaden support for woodland conservation. Visitation to reserves can negatively impact woodlands but should, wherever possible, be compatible with the natural and cultural values of woodlands. Factors such as the number and frequency of visitors, type of activity, visitor behaviour and specific site characteristics will influence how the values of woodlands are impacted and the management approach required to mitigate impacts. Potential impacts include: → →vegetation clearing and soil changes through maintaining access tracks and the creation of unofficial tracks → →introduction of non-native plant species → →removal or damage to sites, vegetation or other habitat → →illegal collection of plants, animals, timber and rocks → →rubbish dumping and deliberate damage → →changes in fauna species composition..
54 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE RECREATIONAL USE OF WOODLANDS → →Undertake effective monitoring of visitor impacts to inform a proactive and adaptive approach to visitor management. → →Undertake effective visitor management, as outlined in Reserve Management Plans, to minimise detrimental impacts on the natural and cultural values of woodlands. → →Effectively communicate with visitors to: → →promote responsible and respectful use of woodland reserves → →promote an understanding of woodland systems and their values, threats and required management → →advise visitors of community safety concerns such as wildfires and native animals → →interpret Aboriginal values and cultural sensitivities of areas to encourage respectful behaviour within woodland reserves. → →Promote the appropriate use of woodland reserves and, where practical, reduce physical barriers to community access. 3. MONITORING AND RESEARCH The ACT Government is committed to the ongoing collection of data and information to contribute to our understanding of woodland ecosystems. The ACT Government supports a research and monitoring process where relevant information is collected, interpreted, disseminated and applied operationally, with monitoring and evaluation in place. A range of projects aimed at addressing knowledge gaps and monitoring woodland condition since the 2004 Lowland Woodland Strategy are published online (ACT Government, 2018h) and are outlined in Section 4.7. These projects, as well as evidence from other literature relevant to lowland and / or subalpine woodland conservation and management, guide the strategies and objectives outlined in this Strategy. 3.1 MONITOR WOODLAND CONDITION Monitoring the condition of ecosystems and the flora and fauna associated with them is critical to recognise change, including gradual change that happens steadily over time (Lindenmayer et al., 2015). Observing and quantifying changes to ecosystems is required to better understand the processes driving these changes and to identify the appropriate management action to address the negative impacts on ecosystems. In this way, monitoring underpins an adaptive management approach to support the protection and conservation of woodlands across the ACT. The ACT Government undertakes regular monitoring of many of its threatened flora and fauna species. These programs are outlined in the respective action plans and conservation advice for threatened species and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland (Part B). Other monitoring programs are established to measure changes in environmental values within a range of ecosystems across the ACT reserve system and offset areas (see SMEC (2016)). Ecological consultants, research institutions and various community groups also undertake monitoring of woodland condition and collect relevant information that can inform management decision making (see Box 7). The ACT Government recently developed the CEMP as a way to systematically and comprehensively monitor the condition of ecosystems across the ACT reserve system. The CEMP identifies a range of indicators, including ecological values and stressors (imposed by threatening processes), to measure ecosystem condition. Information gathered from monitoring projects and qualitative sources, from both government and non-government agencies, is used to assess an ecosystem’s conditions and the effectiveness of relevant management programs. The ACT Government is currently developing a CEMP for ACT woodlands that will, in addition to providing a framework to monitor changes in woodland condition over time and assess the efficacy of management actions, identify knowledge gaps and prioritise future research projects to inform woodland conservation..
PART A 55 COLLECT BASELINE INFORMATION To undertake effective monitoring and management of woodlands requires a detailed understanding of the distribution and characteristics of woodland communities and associated species. Baseline information facilitates the adaptive management of woodlands by enabling managers to monitor changes to woodland ecosystems arising from threatening processes and to track the impact of management interventions. Data has been collected and documented that describes the distribution and characteristics of woodlands in the ACT, including a range of surveys undertaken by the ACT Government prior to the publication of the 2004 Lowland Woodland Strategy. Recent survey and mapping projects outlined in Section 4.7 contribute to this knowledge. However, baseline knowledge gaps exist, providing an opportunity for projects to support informed decision making into the future. Box 7: Canberra Ornithologists Group undertakes critical monitoring of woodland birds The COG has been surveying bird abundance at a number of locations in lowland woodland since 1995. Surveys commenced in Mulligans Flat (then a grazing leasehold) and monitoring locations had been added progressively since. The Woodland Bird Monitoring Project now includes 142 sites at 15 locations across lowland reserve and leasehold areas. Sites include areas of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, and other woodland areas in a range of conditions, including secondary grasslands. Surveys are undertaken seasonally, four times a year. An analysis of long term trends in occupancy of woodland-associated birds, including a number of species in decline, was undertaken recently (Bounds et al., 2010). An analysis to better understand the relationship between habitat change and bird occupancy has also been undertaken (Taws et al., 2011). Species records have been used by the ACT Government to inform management decisions (e.g. fire and reserve visitor management). Importantly, data also informs priority actions for threatened bird species in the ACT. The Woodland Bird Monitoring Project is ongoing and will continue to be a valuable dataset that informs the work of researchers, community groups, and Government and private agencies. Woodland condition monitoring at Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve Woodland condition monitoring at Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve.
56 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES MONITOR WOODLAND CONDITION → →Employ the Woodland CEMP (in development) to guide monitoring priorities. Monitor changes in ecological condition, including the impacts of threats and the effectiveness of management actions within reserves across the ACT. → →Continue to plan and implement monitoring programs to address ecological and management-related questions within woodlands across the ACT by: → →establishing monitoring programs with well-defined objectives, sound experimental design and effective data management and assessment standards → →seeking collaboration with ecological consultants, researchers and community groups with an interest in undertaking monitoring programs within and outside of Territory-owned land → →designing and implementing targeted monitoring programs designed to measure the impact of management actions such as pest animal and invasive species control and restoration works → →designing and implementing targeted, long-term, cross-tenure monitoring to detect environmental drivers of change (e.g. climate change and agents of dieback) and their impacts on woodland condition at an appropriate scale. → →In line with action plans and conservation advice (Part B), monitor threatened, declining and rare species, and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community to: → →detect short-term changes in distribution or abundance that may require management intervention → →determine long-term trend and status in the ACT and broader region → →identify changes in species composition in threatened ecological communities → →evaluate whether management activities are producing desired results. → →In planning monitoring programs, ensure long-term investment and sustained funding and resourcing beyond short-term cycles. → →Collaborate with community groups to collect and use monitoring data systematically and effectively by providing, for example: → →professional and technical advice → →training → →screening and analysis of data → →data collection protocols → →support to access grants and equipment. → →Priority projects to improve baseline information include: → →on-ground assessment of the condition of large patches of lowland woodland and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland across the ACT → →improve knowledge of fauna distribution and abundance in subalpine and lowland woodland and associated ecosystems, particularly in relation to habitat preferences and response to disturbance → →develop methods to improve mapping of secondary grasslands and to monitor changes to its extent, and improve knowledge of the ecological values of this community → →condition mapping of lowland Snow Gum woodland to monitor the change in extent and condition of the community in response to climate change and land use practices..
PART A 57 3.2 ADDRESS KNOWLEDGE GAPS IN WOODLAND CONSERVATION The ACT Government undertakes a range of activities aimed at addressing knowledge gaps and research questions. Wherever possible, collaboration with research institutions, community groups and cross- border agencies provides further opportunity to improve our understanding the flora and fauna associated with woodlands and the ecological processes operating within these ecosystems. A key aim of these projects is to inform the management of woodlands in the ACT and broader region. They also provide information that can be integrated with traditional ecological knowledge and employed by Traditional Custodians when working on Country. A number of current and recently completed research projects are outlined in Section 4.7. Research priorities to improve our understanding and management of threatened species and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are outlined in action plans and conservation advice (Part B). Knowledge gaps that the ACT Government seek to address with dedicated research are listed below. THREATS → →Effects of climate change on lowland and upland woodlands and the best management techniques to improve the resilience of biodiversity to a changing climate (including climatic refugia locations for woodland communities). → →Relationships between pest animal and invasive plant abundance and impacts on woodland values. → →Impacts of fragmentation, and management actions aimed at increasing connectivity, on woodland dependant species. → →Response of fauna to aspects of fire regimes in subalpine and lowland woodlands. → →Drivers of dieback and management actions to effectively mitigate its impact. → →Potential impacts on woodland biodiversity located at or near the urban fringe, and trials of innovative solutions. WOODLAND BIODIVERSITY → →Ecology and diversity of invertebrates associated with woodlands in the region. → →Biology of woodland understory plant species (such as rare orchids and forbs). ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES → →Impact of dense regeneration on biodiversity in woodland reserves. → →Habitat restoration techniques for areas in poor or declining condition (due to invasive plants and pest animal impacts). → →Ecological and conservation outcomes of controlled grazing by livestock. → →Links between woodland vegetation condition and soil microbial communities. → →Effect of disturbance and management on subalpine woodland. A critical outcome for research undertaken or supported by the ACT Government is maintaining strong links with end users of the knowledge generated. Wherever relevant, end users such as ACT Government land managers, private land holders and community groups, should inform the priorities of the research and be involved in various stages of a research project. Correspondingly, the dissemination of research findings back to end users is critical to support land managers to make informed decisions regarding the management of woodland across all tenures. The Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Experiment is an excellent example of multiple stakeholders working together to undertake research that is improving our understanding of woodlands, and is directly informing management activities for woodland restoration across the ACT (see Box 8)..
58 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Box 8: Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment The Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment commenced in 2004 and is a collaboration between The Australian National University, the ACT Government and James Cook University. The site, which includes both Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Woodland Nature Reserves, incorporates approximately 1145 ha of Yellow Box – Blakey’s Red Gum grassy woodland. It is the largest and most intact example of its type in the ACT. The predator proof fence, which was constructed around Mulligans Flat in 2009, will soon be expanded to include the Goorooyarroo Woodland. The project aims to undertake long term research to understand ways of restoring the structure and function of temperate woodlands for biodiversity (Manning et al., 2011). Current research includes monitoring the ecological impact and restoration value of techniques in herbage mass management (including manipulation of fire), grazing impacts, addition of coarse woody debris, feral species exclusion, species introductions within a predator proof sanctuary, and other woodland restoration techniques. Recent highlights include the successful breeding of reintroduced Eastern Bettongs (Bettongia gaimardi) (Portas et al., 2016), New Holland Mouse, Eastern Quoll (Dasyurus viverrinus) and Bush Stone-curlew (Burhinus grallarius). Research findings are building a strong evidence base that is informing restoration and management activities undertaken within woodlands across the region. Importantly, the benefits of retaining and adding coarse woody debris to woodlands (Barton et al., 2011; Manning et al., 2013) has resulted in on ground changes to restoration works and management in the region. Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons)Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons).
PART A 59 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES DELIVER RESEARCH OUTCOMES → →Implement and support research projects to address knowledge gaps and answer ecological questions (priorities outlined above) to inform the adaptive management of woodlands. → →Continue to support the Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodland experiment as a key research and learning site for woodland restoration and management throughout the ACT. → →Identify opportunities to partner with Traditional Custodians to develop research projects that can inform land management, resource use and other activities undertaken by Traditional Custodians in woodlands. → →In line with action plans and conservation advice (Part B), undertake and support research into the ecology and conservation requirements of threatened species and communities, including: → →habitat requirements and key resources, including distribution of key habitats → →effects of habitat modification, land use practices and key threats → →movement patterns, particularly in relation to the availability of key resources and habitat connectivity → →breeding success, survival and recruitment rates of breeding populations. → →In planning and implementing research projects, maintain open dialogue between ACT Government policy, research and land management staff and when appropriate seek collaboration with non-government organisations to: → →identify and prioritise knowledge gaps for future research → →inform research questions and project design → →implement and review projects and share skills and knowledge → →ensure project outcomes are appropriate, accessible and can contribute effectively to the adaptive management of woodlands → →Communicate research results to land managers, including non-government organisations through: → →research and technical reports published on ACT Government website and in scientific journals → →social media platforms (e.g. ACT Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development and ACT Parks and Conservation Service Facebook pages) → →workshops and seminars → →presentations and meetings → →the production of educational resources..
60 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 4. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 4.1 WHAT IS A WOODLAND? Woodland is a general term to describe ecosystems that contain widely spaced trees with crowns that do not overlap and with less than 30% projected foliage cover. Woodland communities vary structurally from low open woodland (trees up to 10 m high with up to 10% projective foliage cover) to tall woodland (trees up to 35 m high with between 10-30% projective foliage cover) (Specht, 1970; Yates & Hobbs, 2000). The understorey of woodlands vary considerably in form, but include a combination of low trees, shrubs, grasses, herbs and graminoids (Yates & Hobbs, 2000). Ground layer vegetation constitutes most of the plant diversity in a woodland. High quality grassy woodlands have an especially diverse range of native ground-layer species (including orchids, lilies, wildflowers, sub-shrubs and grasses) (Stol & Prober, 2015). The structure of a woodland is determined, at least in part, by influences operating at a local level (e.g. disturbance and regeneration). This can result in a structure that is more characteristic of other associated ecosystems. For example, patches of woodland dominated by Snow Gum in the ACT have dense regeneration following the 2003 wildfires and resemble forests. Furthermore, former woodland habitat that has been subject to widespread clearing of canopy trees and woody mid-storey vegetation, but maintains a relatively intact, diverse understorey of native grasses and forbs, is termed a ‘derived’ or ‘secondary’ grassland and, where appropriate, is managed as a woodland community according to this Strategy. WOODLANDS IN THE REGION Lowland and subalpine woodland in the ACT occur within the South Eastern Highlands (SEH) Bioregion and Australian Alps Bioregion respectively (Environment Australia, 2000; Thackway & Cresswell, 1995). The SEH Bioregion covers approximately 80% of the ACT and includes the ranges and plateaus of the Great Dividing Range within southern NSW and eastern Victoria. It is characterised by sclerophyll forests, woodland, grassland and cool rainforests (Environment Australia, 2000). Located at a higher altitude and surrounded by the SHE Bioregion, the Australian Alps Bioregion has a restricted extent within NSW, Victoria and southwest ACT. It is characterised by treeless communities, Eucalyptus woodlands and alpine ash forests (Environment Australia, 2000). 4.2 A BRIEF HISTORY OF WOODLAND IN THE ACT AND SURROUNDING REGION TRADITIONAL CUSTODIANS For over 25 000 years, the life of Aboriginal people was directly connected with the ecosystems that sustained them and the health of the people was dependent on the health of the Country. The lowland and foothill areas of the ACT provided reliable resources for Traditional Custodians at particular times of the year, including food (e.g. Yam Daisy [Microseris sp.]) and materials for tools and weapons (e.g. Blakely’s Red Gum). Subalpine woodlands and associated ecosystems also provided some seasonal (e.g. Bogong Moth [Agrotis infusa]) and reliable (e.g. Lomandra longifolia) resources, which allowed Aboriginal people to exploit the subalpine areas (Bowdler, 1981; Coyne, 2000). Of particular nutritional and cultural significance was the Bogong Moth, which breeds on the plains and moves to the mountains to aestivate during summer. While Traditional Custodians no longer rely on traditional resources to survive, retaining a connection to traditional lands remains important in defining and maintaining cultural identity. The use of woodlands by Traditional Custodians has shaped the structure and function of woodlands and other ecosystems. For instance, lowland woodlands have evolved with relatively frequent burning as fire was a tool used by Traditional Custodians to stimulate green pick for marsupial grazers and to promote the growth of favoured plant resources (Stol & Prober, 2015). While Traditional Custodians used fire quite extensively in the foothills and lower tablelands, there is no evidence or known reason that fire was used to manipulate the landscape across the higher altitudes (Coyne, 2000). Thus fires, primarily ignited by lightning strikes, were likely to be less frequent in upland woodlands. While details about the historic severity, extent and frequency of traditional burning in the region is unknown, the discovery and occupation of the local area by European settlers resulted in significant modification to traditional burning regimes..
PART A 61 EARLY EUROPEAN EXPLORATION AND SETTLEMENT The Canberra district and broader region was first visited by European explorers in the 1810s and early 1820s. Early explorers reported prime grazing country, including expanses of grassland and open woodland with a variety of grasses and herbs. By the mid-1820s the region was colonised by those keen to secure land for grazing. The earliest landholdings within what is present-day ACT were clustered around rivers and creeks and initial stocking was possible without the need to undertake extensive tree felling (Costin, 1954; Moore, 1970). The ensuing expansion and intensification of pastoralism in the region led to large scale clearing (and ringbarking) of trees, converting what were continuous tracts of lowland woodland to fragments of various sizes. The introduction of pasture species and selective grazing (often at high densities) also significantly modified the ground cover vegetation of these areas. Fire became a tool which was used or suppressed to improve and maintain pasture value (Costin, 1954). Summertime grazing in the subalpine and alpine tracts of grasslands and grassy woodlands commenced in the 1830s. Woodlands and forests in the valley areas were cleared for both grazing and small-scale farming. Minor infrastructure, including homes, roads and drainage, was established in association with the pastoral industry. Native trees were used as a major source material for fencing, buildings and fuel (Carron, 1985). Fortunately, the establishment of the ACT in 1911 and associated leasehold tenure and planning policies discouraged the adoption of intense pasture improvement techniques commonly adopted in the region from the 1950s onwards (e.g. increased mechanisation, use of sown pastures and fertilisers) (Stol & Prober, 2015). The termination of grazing leases in the highlands during this time also limited the long-term impacts of grazing within subalpine systems. Snow Gum woodland, Namadgi National Park Snow Gum woodland, Namadgi National Park.
62 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY HISTORICAL DISTRIBUTION Prior to European settlement temperate woodlands were widespread; their distribution was driven primarily by responses to environmental conditions (e.g. climate, topography, hydrology and soil type), disturbance (e.g. storms and fire) and biotic interactions (e.g. with native grazers) (Yates & Hobbs, 2000). In the south east, woodlands were the dominant vegetation type inland of the Great Dividing Range, from southern Queensland through NSW, Victoria and into South Australia (Yates & Hobbs, 2000). While woodlands remain geographically widespread, the current distribution of temperate lowland woodland reflects the preferential clearing of the most fertile areas in plains, lower slopes and stream valleys. Today, many woodlands persist as degraded, often small, remnants amongst forests and grasslands. Approximately 96% of the Yellow Box - Apple Box Grassy Woodlands vegetation class has been lost from its former distribution across the South-East Highlands bioregion in NSW. Other modelling estimates that more than 90% of lowland woodland (dominated by Yellow Box, Blakely’s Red Gum, White Box [Eucalyptus albens] and / or Apple Box) has been cleared in the Tumut region in NSW (bordering the ACT and Victoria) (Landsberg, 2000). Other areas in NSW have approximately 1 – 7% of the pre 1750 extent of White Box–Yellow Box–Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland community remaining (Austin et al., 2000; Gibbons & Boak, 2002). Modelling undertaken by Gellie (2005) predicts the Southern Tablelands Yellow Box-Apple Box Grassy Woodlands vegetation class (which comprises four widespread lowland woodland communities in the ACT) covered an area of approximately 47 000 ha in the ACT prior to 1750 (see Figure 4). Comparison of this historic distribution with mapping of extant vegetation across the ACT illustrates approximately 11 568 ha or 25% of this vegetation class exists across its former distribution (note, this excludes derived grasslands and woodland that exists outside of the pre-1750 distribution modelled by Gellie (2005)). Comparatively, there has been little clearing of upland woodland in the ACT and broader region. It is estimated that 99% of the historic distribution of woodlands dominated by Snow Gum in the ACT exists today (Landsberg, 2000).Yam Daisy Yam Daisy.
PART A 63 Figure 4: Historic (pre 1750)* and current (2018) distribution of lowland woodlands** in the ACTHistoric (pre 1750) and current (2018) distribution of lowland woodlands in the ACT * Modelled by (Gellie, 2005) ** Southern Tablelands Yellow Box-Apple Box Grassy Woodlands vegetation class (incorporating u178, u19, q6 and u78).
64 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 4.3 THREATENED AND UNCOMMON WOODLAND SPECIES IN THE ACT THREATENED SPECIES Native woodlands in the ACT provide critical habitat for a range of threatened flora and fauna species. This includes three plant species and nine bird species that are listed as threatened under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 and several species listed as threatened in other jurisdictions (Table 3). Other threatened species found in the ACT are associated with both woodlands and other ecosystems (such as grasslands or forests). These species are listed in Table 3. The ACT Government is working to align the method for assessing and listing threatened species with those categories and criteria adopted under the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). This will ensure the consistent use of threat categories with the Australian Government, and thus contribute to the development of a single operational list of nationally threatened species (see Commonwealth Government (2015a)). The Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary also provides critical habitat for several species that have been reintroduced to the ACT. This includes established populations of: New Holland Mouse, Eastern Bettong, Eastern Quoll and Bush Stone Curlew. Hoary Sunray, Mt Majura (E. Cook) Hoary Sunray, Mt Majura (E. Cook).
PART A 65 Table 3: Threatened flora and fauna species found in woodlands. V = vulnerable, E = endangered, CE = critically endangered COMMON NAME SPECIES ACT NSW/VIC* C’WLTH SUBALPINE / LOWLAND THREATENED IN THE ACT (WOODLAND DEPENDENT) FAUNA Brown Treecreeper Climacteris picumnus V - - Lowland Hooded Robin Melanodryas cucullata V - - Lowland Painted Honeyeater Grantiella picta V V (VIC, NSW) V Lowland Regent Honeyeater Anthochaera phrygia V CE (VIC, NSW) CE Lowland Scarlet Robin Petroica boodang V V (NSW) - Lowland Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii V V (NSW) E (VIC) V Lowland Swift Parrot Lathamus discolor V E (NSW, VIC) CE Lowland Varied Sittella Daphoenositta chrysoptera V V (NSW) - Lowland White-Winged Triller Lalage sueurii V - - Lowland FLORA Canberra Spider Orchid Arachnorchis actensis E - CE Lowland Small Purple Pea Swainsona recta E E (VIC, NSW) E Lowland Tarengo Leek Orchid Prasophyllum petilum E E (NSW) E Lowland THREATENED IN THE ACT (ASSOCIATED WITH WOODLAND) FAUNA Pink Tailed Worm Lizard Aprasia parapulchella V E (VIC) V Lowland Spotted-tailed Quoll Dasyurus maculatus V V (NSW), E (VIC) E Lowland Little Eagle Hieraaetus morphnoides V V (NSW) - Lowland Pink-tailed Worm- lizard Aprasia parapulchella V V (NSW, E (VIC) V Lowland Glossy Black Cockatoo Calyptorhynchus lathami V V (NSW, VIC) - Lowland Perunga Grasshopper Perunga ochracea V - - Lowland Golden Sun Moth Synemon plana E E (NSW), CE (VIC) CE Lowland Striped Legless Lizard Delma impar V V (NSW), E (VIC) V Lowland Northern Corroboree Frog Pseudophryne pengilleyi E CE (NSW) CE Subalpine Smoky mouse Pseudomys fumeus E CE (NSW), E (VIC) E Subalpine Button Wrinklewort Rutidosis leptorhynchoides E E (NSW) E Lowland.
66 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY COMMON NAME SPECIES ACT NSW/VIC* C’WLTH SUBALPINE / LOWLAND THREATENED OUTSIDE THE ACT FAUNA Barking Owl Ninox connivens - V (NSW), E (VIC) - Lowland Black Falcon Falco subniger - V (NSW, VIC) - Lowland Broad-toothed Rat Mastacomys fuscus - V (NSW), E (VIC) V Subalpine Diamond Firetail Stagonopleura guttata - V (NSW), NT (VIC) - Lowland Dusky Woodswallow Artamus cyanopterus - V (NSW) - Lowland Flame Robin Petroica phoenicea - V (NSW) - Lowland / Subalpine Gang Gang Cockatoo Callocephalon fimbriatum - V (NSW) - Subalpine / Lowland Greater Glider Petauroides volans - V (VIC) V Subalpine Speckled Warbler Chthonicola sagittata - V (NSW, VIC) - Lowland FLORA Austral Toadflax Thesium australe - V (VIC, NSW) V Lowland Black Gum Eucalyptus aggregata - V (NSW), E (VIC) V Lowland Blue-tongued Greenhood Pterostylis oreophila - CE (NSW), E (VIC) CE Subalpine Hoary Sunray Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor - E (VIC) E Lowland Kydra Dampiera Dampiera fusca - E (NSW, VIC) - Subalpine Mountain Spider Orchid Caladenia montana - V (NSW) - Subalpine Pale Pomaderris Pomaderris pallida - V (NSW) V Lowland Summer Leek Orchid Prasophyllum canaliculatum - CE (NSW) - Subalpine *As listed under the Victoria Threatened Species Advisory List and / or under the Victorian Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 RARE AND DATA DEFICIENT SPECIES Woodlands in the ACT provide critical habitat for a number of flora and fauna species that, although not listed as threatened species under ACT or Commonwealth legislation, are of conservation concern (see Table 4). These species may be susceptible to local extinction because of their small overall population size and / or restricted distribution within the ACT. Several species (considered to be rare in the ACT) are listed as ‘Data Deficient’; more information (e.g. distribution and abundance) is required to determine the conservation status of these species..
PART A 67 Table 4: Rare flora and fauna species found in woodlands in the ACT COMMON NAME SPECIES SUBALPINE / LOWLAND RARE FAUNA Alpine Darner Dragonfly Austroaeschna flavomaculata Subalpine Alpine Redspot Dragonfly Austropetalia tonyana Subalpine Bronze Ant-blue Butterfly Acrodipsas brisbanensis Subalpine Golden Ant-Blue Butterfly Acrodipsas aurata Lowland Harriss’s Peacock Spider Maratus harrissi Subalpine Key’s Matchstick Grasshopper Keyacris Scura Lowland Montane Grass-Skipper Anisynta monticolae Subalpine Moonlight Jewel Hypochrysops delicia Lowland Rosernbergs Monitor Varanus rosenbergi Lowland Silky Hairstreak Pseudalmenus chlorinda Subalpine Small Alpine Xenica Oreixenica latialis Subalpine Small Ant-blue Butterfly Acrodipsas mymecophila Lowland Springtail – undescribed Australotomurus sp. Lowland - Tomocerus militum Lowland RARE FLORA Alpine Starbush Asterolasia trymalioides Subalpine Simple-leaved Dwarf Boronia Boronia nana var. hyssopifolia Subalpine Moonwort Botrychium lunaria Subalpine Cunningham’s Gentian Chionogentias cunninghamii Subalpine Late Forest Gentian Chionogentias sylvicola Subalpine Coprosma Coprosma nivalis Subalpine Erect Midge Orchid Corunastylis arrecta Subalpine Billy buttons Craspedia aurantia Subalpine Kydra Dampiera Dampiera fusca Subalpine Small Snake Orchid Diuris subalpina Subalpine Tiny Willowherb Epilobium curtisiae Subalpine Mountain Willowherb Epilobium sarmentaceum Subalpine Argyle Apple Eucalyptus cinerea subsp. triplex Subalpine Tingaringi Gum Eucalyptus glaucescens Subalpine Spinning Gum Eucalyptus perriniana Subalpine Brindabella Potato Orchid Gastrodia entomogama Subalpine Small Royal Grevillea Grevillea diminuta Subalpine - Logania granitica Subalpine Smooth Nardoo Marsilea mutica Subalpine Kangaroo Fern Microsorum pustulatum subsp. pustulatum Subalpine Thyme Mitrewort Mitrasacme serpyllifolia Subalpine Sweet Forget-me-not Myosotis exarrhena Subalpine Daisybush Olearia rhizomatica Subalpine.
68 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY COMMON NAME SPECIES SUBALPINE / LOWLAND RARE FLORA Silver Caraway Oreomyrrhis argentea Subalpine Scaly Everlastingbush Ozothamnus cupressoides Subalpine Swamp Everlastingbush Ozothamnus rosmarinifolius Subalpine Parantennaria Parantennaria uniceps Subalpine Austral Pillwort Pilularia novae-hollandiae Subalpine Hairy Pomaderris Pomaderris phylicifolia subsp. ericoides Subalpine Brindabella Leek Orchid Prasophyllum montanum Subalpine Subalpine Leek Orchid Prasophyllum sphacelatum Subalpine Mountain Greenhood Pterostylis alpina Subalpine Dwarf Buttercup Ranunculus millanii Subalpine Big Bird Orchid Simpliglottis turfosa Subalpine Shining Westringia Westringia lucida Subalpine DATA DEFICIENT FLORA Alpine Wattle Acacia alpina Subalpine Velvet Wheatgrass Australopyrum velutinum Subalpine Yellow-leaved Sedge Carex rara subsp. capillacea Subalpine Snow Daisy Celmisia pugioniformis Subalpine Mountain Correa Correa lawrenceana var. lawrenceana Subalpine Grey Billy Buttons Craspedia canens Subalpine - Deyeuxia crassiuscula Subalpine Alpine Native Cherry Exocarpos nanus Subalpine - Geranium obtusisepalum Subalpine Mountain Needlebush Hakea lissosperma Subalpine Alpine Clubsedge Isolepis crassiuscula Subalpine - Juncus alexandri Subalpine Matted Water Milfoil Myriophyllum pedunculatum subsp. pedunculatum Subalpine Kosciuszko Rose Pimelea ligustrina subsp. ciliata Subalpine Tall Riceflower Pimelea ligustrina subsp. ligustrina Subalpine Mountain Plum Pine Podocarpus lawrencei Subalpine Sickle Orchid Pterostylis falcata Subalpine - Simpliglottis sp. aff. valida Subalpine Mountain Triggerplant Stylidium montanum Subalpine Mountain Dandelion Taraxacum aristum Subalpine Mountain Hooksedge Uncinia flaccida Subalpine Thyme Speedwell Veronica serpyllifolia Subalpine.
PART A 69 4.4 TRADITIONAL AND CONTEMPORARY ABORIGINAL VALUES Ngunnawal people participated in trade with neighbouring language groups such as Wiradjuri, Walgalu, Yuin, Ngarigo, Gundungurra and Ngambri. Ceremonies, corroborees and the collection of seasonal foods such as Bogong Moths brought large gatherings of Aboriginal people from the greater region to Ngunnawal Country. These gatherings facilitated the exchange of knowledge between groups and maintained connectivity between them. The stories and corresponding traditional rights and responsibilities to manage certain places are complex and are handed down primarily through family lines. The stories associated with the Dreaming not only determine custodianship of Country, they also impart important knowledge related to the environment and its management. This includes information about the relationships between all living organisms (including the interactions between humans and the environment), information about seasonal changes, the ecology and use of many organisms, and the effect of fire and other disturbances on the landscape. For Aboriginal people being ‘on Country’ provides an opportunity to maintain connections with the spirits of the land and to uphold traditional responsibilities to care for the Country. This includes maintaining cultural sites and their associated stories that link places to people. There are 580 recorded Aboriginal sites in woodlands across the ACT. Sites that are associated with Dreaming stories include notable landforms such as hills, mountains, ridgelines and water places. For example, Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura, which comprise several woodland communities, are important men’s and women’s sites. Numerous archaeological sites are located within woodlands in the ACT; they provide evidence of Ngunnawal people and other language groups occupying and undertaking ceremonial activities in the ACT region for thousands of years. Sites within lowland woodland include scarred trees, and artefact (knapping or camp), burial, corroboree and rock art sites. While there are fewer known sites located in subalpine woodlands, very significant stone arrangement sites, which mark important ceremonial locations, are found at the top of a number of hills and mountains amongst woodland dominated by Snow Gum. Known Bogong Moth aestivation sites on exposed rock shelters and caves are also associated with several subalpine woodland communities. Sites within the ACT reserve system continue to be uncovered opportunistically by visitors and land managers. Disturbance events that expose the landscape (e.g. the 2003 wildfires) have facilitated the discovery of many sites. The Cultural Heritage Management Framework (in development) will identify a number of priorities that will guide future survey effort and provide advice on the ongoing management and conservation of Aboriginal heritage values. 4.5 WOODLAND MANAGEMENT PLANS Management plans set prescriptions for the effective management of woodland sites. Management plans in place for native woodland areas in the ACT are outlined in Table 5. Incorporating flexibility into plans to account for underlying uncertainty is a key component of an adaptive management approach. The woodland located in ACT Government Horse Holding Paddocks is managed according to a Business Plan and Service Agreement agreed to by Territory Agistment and the ACT Government. Through the provision of advice and educational materials, collaborative management opportunities and grants, Land Management Agreements, and through enforcement of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the ACT Conservator of Flora and Fauna will continue to encourage rural lessees to manage native woodland on their lands to maintain and improve their condition as outlined in this Strategy. A number of travelling stock reserves contain woodland and are actively managed without strategic management plans in place (i.e. Hall, Hume, Kowen, Paddy’s River, Tharwa, Uriarra Rd, Melrose and Williamsdale). The Suburban Land Agency also recently acquired land parcels in the Molonglo – Murrumbidgee area that contain large areas of lowland woodland. No conservation management plans are in place to protect the ecological values of this area..
70 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Table 5: Management Plans for areas that include woodland in the ACT NAME MANAGEMENT PLAN Nature Reserve Namadgi National Park (ACT Government, 2010b) Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve (ACT Government, 2012b) Canberra Nature Park To be finalised Lower Cotter Catchment Reserve (ACT Government, 2018e) Offset Molongolo Valley (ACT Government, 2013c) Kinlyside (ACT Government, 2015c, 2015d) Horsepark North Jacka Taylor Throsby (ACT Government, 2015b, 2015d) Kenny Broadacre Isaacs Ridge (ACT Government, 2017c) Justice Robert Hope Park (ACT Government, 2018d) The Pinnacle (ACT Government, 2016c) Bonner (ACT Government, 2016b) Williamsdale (Eco Logical Australia, 2010) Ginninderry Development / Conservation Corridor (TRC Tourism, 2018) (SMEC, 2018) ACT Government Land (other) Gunghalin Region (ACT Government, 2007b) Hughes Garran Woodland (Fearnside et al., 2012) Hall Cemetery (ACT Government, 2013b) National Capital Authority Conservation Areas Stirling Park, Yarralumla, State Circle Woodland and O’Malley Diplomatic Estate (Sharp, 2016) Majura Federal Police Training Facility (Commonwealth Government, 2012) Australian Government Department of Defence Land Majura Training Area (Commonwealth Government, 2016a) Icon Water pipeline corridor Murrumbidgee to Googong water transfer (Icon Water, 2017).
PART A 71 4.6 RELEVANT POLICY AND LEGISLATION Management of threatened species and ecological communities is guided by international and national agreements, policy and legislation. Several legislative instruments in the ACT also recognise, and provide for the protection of the ecological and cultural values of woodlands. INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONAL CONTEXT The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity is an international legal instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. Australia ratified the Convention in 1993 and, in line with the Convention, prepared the first national biodiversity strategy in 1996 → →(ANZECC, 1996). This document has since been reviewed and replaced by Australia’s Strategy for Nature 2018 – 2030 (Commonwealth Government, 2018) and the Strategy for Australia’s National Reserve System 2009–2030 (Commonwealth Government, 2009). → →The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) establishes criteria for assessing the conservation status of a species. The ACT Scientific Committee (a statutory committee under the Nature Conservation Act 2014) is guided by the IUCN criteria when assessing the conservation status of species in the ACT. → →The Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 includes criteria for environmental impact assessments and provides for the protection of ‘matters of national environmental significance’. The Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is part of the EPBC-listed White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland. Several woodland-dependant species listed as threatened in the ACT are also listed as matters of national environmental significance under the EPBC Act. An ACT Environmental Offsets Policy is required by the Commonwealth Government under the EPBC Act. To date, all offsets in the ACT have been assessed according to the EPBC Act environmental offset policy. → →In accordance with the ACT Planning and Land Management Act 1988, the National Capital Plan seeks to ensure Canberra and the ACT are planned and developed in accordance with their national significance. This includes conserving and enhancing the landscape features that give the national capital its character and that contribute to the integration of natural and urban environments (Commonwealth Government, 2016b). ACT LEGISLATION → →The Nature Conservation Act 2014 provides for the protection and management of native plants and animals in the ACT. This includes the identification and management of threatened species and ecological communities and authority of the ACT reserve network. The Nature Conservation Act 2014 prescribes the statutory functions of a number of government staff, including the Conservator of Flora and Fauna, Conservation Officers, and Parks and Conservation Service roles. It also includes provisions for offences against native species. → →The Planning and Development Act 2007 has provisions for sustainable development. Development proposals that may significantly impact a threatened species or ecological community require an environmental impact assessment under this Act. This Act includes requirements for environmental offsets in the ACT. The ACT Environmental Offsets Policy outlines a consistent way in which environmental compensation must be made to offset the impact of development or other activities that have a significant adverse impact on natural (and other protected) assets. The ACT Environmental Offsets Policy is supported by an environmental offsets calculator, which determines whether a protected matter will be subject to a significant adverse environmental impact and the minimum acceptable environmental offset required. The calculator also identifies when the impact on a species or ecological community requires the Conservator of Flora and Fauna to consider whether offsets are appropriate. The Planning and Development Act 2007 requires a Territory Plan to ensure, in a manner not inconsistent with the National Capital Plan, the planning and development of the ACT provide the people of the ACT with an attractive, safe and efficient environment in which to live, work and have their recreation. The Territory Plan is the key statutory planning document in the ACT. The Act also requires a planning strategy.
72 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY for the ACT that sets out long term planning policy and goals to promote the orderly and sustainable development of the ACT, consistent with the social, environmental and economic aspirations of the people of the ACT. The ACT Planning Strategy is the key strategic document for managing growth and change in the Territory. Land Management Agreements between rural landholders and the ACT Government are required under this Act. → →The Tree Protection Act 2005 protects trees in urban areas of the ACT that have exceptional natural or cultural value. This legislation protects trees that are not otherwise protected under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. → →The Pest Plants and Animals Act 2005 identifies pest plants and animals in the ACT. It prescribes approaches to manage pest species, including the development of pest plant and animal management plans. → →The Emergencies Act 2004 requires the development of a Strategic Bushfire Management Plan which guides the management of fire in the ACT. → →The Human Rights Act 2004 acknowledges that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people hold distinct cultural rights and must not be denied the right to maintain, protect and develop their culture. The Act recognises their material and economic relationship with the land, waters and other resources. → →The Heritage Act 2004 establishes a system for the recognition and conservation of places and objects of natural, historic and Aboriginal cultural significance through, for example, the development of Conservation Management Plans. All Aboriginal places, such as trees culturally modified by Traditional Custodians, are afforded protection by the Heritage Act 2004, and a number of woodland areas that provide habitat for threatened species are also registered on the ACT Heritage Register. Representative Aboriginal Organisations are also declared under the Heritage Act 2004, and these groups have a statutory role in the assessment and management of Aboriginal heritage in the ACT. → →The Domestic Animals Act 2000 includes provisions for declaring cat containment areas. 4.7 PROGRESS SINCE THE 2004 LOWLAND WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY The 2004 Woodland Strategy identified three primary conservation objectives. These objectives, and progress made towards meeting them, is briefly summarised below. Note, these objectives are not commitments under the 2019 Woodland Conservation Strategy. A more detailed summary of progress against meeting these objectives is available in the Woodlands For Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodlands Conservation Strategy Progress Report 2018 (ACT Government, 2018h). → →Conserve in perpetuity all types of lowland woodland communities in the ACT, as viable and well-represented ecological systems. With the addition of several new reserves and extensions to existing reserves, over 1100 ha of woodland (including secondary grasslands) have been added to the reserve network. This includes approximately 600 ha of lowland box gum woodland that contain some Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community. Other woodland areas are now managed as environmental offset areas or have been re-zoned to other tenures managed by the ACT Government for conservation. → →Conserve in perpetuity, viable, wild populations of all lowland woodland flora and fauna species in the ACT and support regional and national efforts towards conservation of these species (including declared threatened species). Research and monitoring undertaken by the ACT Government, community groups and research institutions has improved our understanding of the distribution and habitat requirements of threatened woodland plants and birds, and the processes threatening their survival. Particularly noteworthy is the Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodlands Experiment, which has enhanced our knowledge of a range of management techniques including herbage mass management, pest animal control, native fauna reintroductions and habitat restoration techniques. The ACT Government continues to trial Eastern Grey Kangaroo fertility techniques while undertaking an active control program to maintain sustainable wild populations..
PART A 73 Monitoring undertaken by the ACT Government indicates that current management is ensuring the persistence and viability of a number of woodland dependant species, including the sole population of the threatened Tarengo Leek Orchid at Hall Cemetery. → →Manage and rehabilitate lowland woodlands across all tenures with appropriate regeneration, restoration and reinstatement practices. There has been significant investment by the Australian Government, ACT Government and non-government organisations to implement management and restoration activities, and to undertake research projects to improve our understanding of restoration techniques. Relevant initiatives of the ACT Government are listed below; details of major projects are provided in Section 4.8. → →ACT Woodland Restoration Project (Greater Goorooyarroo region) and Biodiversity Fund Projects (2011 - 2017). → →Investment and support provided to National and ACT Landcare Program → →One Million Trees Project (2008 - 2018). → →Management and restoration activities undertaken at conservation offset areas (including Barrer Hill, Molonglo Valley, Throsby, Isaac and Watson). → →Research illustrating the benefits of adding coarse woody debris to woodland and the subsequent addition of over 4 000 tonnes of coarse woody debris to woodland in the ACT.Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons) Mulligans Flat Woodland Sanctuary (M. Jekabsons).
74 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 4.8 WOODLAND CONSERVATION AND RESEARCH ACTIVITIES IN THE ACT SINCE 2004 Many conservation activities that aim to protect, manage and restore woodlands have been undertaken since the 2004 Lowland Woodland Strategy was released. Community groups, research institutions and the ACT Government have also sought to better understand woodland ecosystems through research, mapping and monitoring of woodland sites and woodland biodiversity (including threatened species). An outline of these activities is provided below. RESTORATION AND CONSERVATION ACTIVITIES Since the 2004 Strategy, a number of projects that aimed to enhance and restore woodland have been undertaken throughout the ACT. Major projects included: → →The ACT Woodland Restoration Project and Biodiversity Fund Project, which aimed to enhance woodland connectivity and condition using a whole of landscape approach, engage the community in woodland restoration, introduce missing habitat elements and undertake invasive species control. The projects were funded by the Commonwealth and ACT Governments and delivered by Greening Australia Capital Region and the ACT Government, in collaboration with rural landholders and other community and volunteer groups. The projects were implemented across all land tenures in the ACT; major achievements included: > > engagement of 18 rural landowners, and 43 schools / community groups > > over 900 ha of revegetation, including 28 548 tube stocks planted and 101 km of direct seeding > > enhancement and protection of 844 ha of remnant woodland (including the distribution of 4 415 tonnes of coarse woody debris) > > invasive species control over an area of 4 494 ha > > feral animal control over an area of 9 555 ha > > establishment of 10 monitoring sites to review different treatment types and techniques. → →Preparation of a woodland restoration plan for Barrer Hill and Misery Point (together encompassing approximately 50 ha in the Molonglo Valley) (SMEC, 2014). Restoration activities included: revegetation, addition of rock and coarse woody debris, scraping topsoil at a site dominated by exotic species and reseeding with native flora, direct seeding, interpretative signage and the planned addition of vertical habitat structure. → →Planting box-gum woodland trees and understorey species (approximately 2000 plants) at 15 plots within and adjacent to the National Arboretum to improve connectivity between Black Mountain and the Molonglo River corridor. One hundred logs have also been added throughout the plots. → →Trialling forb enhancement techniques in Kama Nature Reserve. The project has illustrated that native forb enhancement via direct seeding is a viable technique where there is appropriate soil fertility and when biomass is reduced (Johnson et al., 2018) → →Large-scale restoration program (including soil erosion works and replanting) within the Lower Cotter Catchment (LCC) following extensive loss of vegetation during the wildfires in 2003. Restoration activities will be maintained to support natural regeneration of forest and woodland communities. → →Collaboration between the Australian National Botanic Gardens (ANBG) and the ACT Government to collect and store the seed of a number of understorey species, including several rare and threatened species. Seed of the Canberra Spider Orchid and Tarengo Leek Orchid are banked at the ANBG and a translocation plan is currently being developed for the Canberra Spider Orchid (see action plans, Part B). → →One Million Trees Project: as outlined in the ACT Government’s Climate Change Strategy 2007 – 2011 (ACT Government, 2007a), the ACT Government, with funding support from the Commonwealth Government, aimed to plant one million trees between 2007 and 2017. Plantings occurred in the LCC, the Murrumbidgee River Corridor (MRC) and within urban areas. The LCC and MRC plantings were undertaken strategically to increase the connectivity of woodland patches across multiple tenures (including rural lands), increase riparian and woodland habitat for fauna, stabilise soils and provide future carbon sequestration..
PART A 75 → →To address the loss of habitat values associated with mature trees (including carved hollows and artificial bark), the addition of vertical structures enriched with fauna habitat is being trialled and monitored in the Molonglo Valley. → →Activities towards restoring woodland areas as part of environmental offset requirements have been undertaken at Isaacs Ridge, Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Areas and Justice Robert Hope Park (for woodland locations see: ACT Government (2017c), ACT Government (2015c) and ACT Government (2018b) respectively). Activities include, but are not limited to, weed and pest animal monitoring and control, monitoring threatened species and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, the addition of coarse woody debris, macropod monitoring and control, and revegetation. → →The declaration of the Scarlet Robin as Vulnerable in May 2015, under the Nature Conservation Act 1980 (and later, the Nature Conservation Act 2014). An associated action plan was developed and is included in Part B of this Strategy. EASTERN GREY KANGAROO MANAGEMENT Since 2009 the ACT Government has actively monitored and managed Eastern Grey Kangaroos in the ACT. The control program aims to maintain wild populations of kangaroos while managing their environmental, economic and social impacts. Culling for conservation purposes is undertaken across sixteen reserves (and some adjacent properties), many of which contain areas of the Endangered YB-BRG Grassy Woodland community or natural temperate grassland communities. The program is managed in accordance with the Controlled Native Species Management Plan for Eastern Grey Kangaroos (ACT Government, 2017b), and the ACT Kangaroo Management Plan (ACT Government, 2010a). Culling numbers are determined according to the Nature Conservation (Eastern Grey Kangaroo) Conservation Culling Calculator (ACT Government, 2018f). Where possible, conservation culling is also managed cooperatively with land managers of surrounding properties, including the Commonwealth Government and rural landholders (as outlined in ACT Government (2017b) and ACT Government (2017d)). Culling of Eastern Grey Kangaroos on rural properties is permitted to mitigate the economic impacts of grazing. It may also contribute to managing long-term sustainable densities of kangaroos and meeting the conservation objectives outlined in the Controlled Native Species Management Plan for Eastern Grey Kangaroos (see: ACT Government (2017b)). MULLIGANS FLAT – GOOROOYARROO WOODLAND EXPERIMENT The Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment commenced in 2004 and is a collaboration between The Australian National University, the ACT Government, James Cook University and the CSIRO. The site incorporates approximately 1145 ha of Yellow Box – Blakey’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. It is the largest and most intact example of its type in the ACT. The project aims to undertake long term research to understand ways of restoring the structure and function of temperate woodlands for biodiversity (Manning et al., 2011). Current research includes monitoring the ecological impact and restoration value of techniques in biomass management (including manipulation of fire), grazing impacts, coarse woody debris, feral species exclusion, species introductions within a predator proof sanctuary, and other woodland restoration techniques (including fauna reintroductions). Research findings are building a strong evidence base that is informing restoration and management activities undertaken within woodlands across the region (see: www.mfgowoodlandexperiment.org.au)..
76 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY COMMUNITY CONSERVATION WORK Through education, advocacy and on-ground initiatives, community groups play a key role in the protection and conservation of native woodlands in the ACT. Below are a number of major projects and initiatives implemented by community groups since 2004. → →Educational forums and workshops (e.g. Friends of Grassland’s 2004 ‘Grass half full or grass half empty? Valuing native grassy landscapes’ forum). → →Contributions to, and maintenance of, Canberra Nature Map, which provides a comprehensive, accessible and educational map of fauna and flora across the ACT. → →On-ground management and engagement activities undertaken by ParkCare groups. These include: weed treatment, ecological surveys and monitoring, grazing and erosion control, tree and shrub planting, interpretive walks for the public, and running information stalls. → →On-ground management and restoration projects facilitated by Landcare ACT and the Molonglo, Ginninderra and Southern ACT Catchment Groups. → →Production of community education resources, including newsletters (e.g. Canberra Bird Notes and the Gang-Gang newsletter published by COG) and resources to assist community members to undertake regular and consistent woodland management activities. → →The Canberra Indian Myna Action Group was formed in 2006 to reduce the impact of Indian Mynas in and around Canberra. → →The Southern Tablelands Ecosystems Park (STEP), established within the National Arboretum, represents the major forest and woodland communities in the region, including the Endangered YB-BRG Grassy Woodland community. → →The ‘Caring for Ngunnawal Pathways’ project, developed by the Molonglo Catchment Group (in partnership with Buru Ngunnawal Aboriginal Corporation, Thunderstone Aboriginal Cultural and Land Management Services, Friends of Grasslands, Save Stirling Park, Yarralumla Residents Association and the ACT Government) engages Ngunnawal people in the restoration of a culturally and ecologically important site at Yarralumla called Bullan Mura. → →The expansion of COG’s long-term monitoring program of woodland birds to include 142 sites at 15 locations across reserve and leasehold areas. The long term data set was analysed by COG in 2010 (see Bounds et al. (2010)) and an analysis of the relationship between habitat change and bird occupancy was undertaken in 2011 (Taws et al., 2011). An updated analysis of long- term woodland bird data (and an associated report) is currently underway. → →The establishment of the Grassy Woodlands Stakeholder Group: a consultative committee comprised of representatives from several community groups engaged in conservation and land management within the ACT. The group meets to discuss a range of issues and exchange ideas and information with the ACT Government regarding the conservation of lowland woodlands. This includes providing input into the development of this Strategy. → →A recommendation to list the “Loss of Native Hollow- bearing Trees” as a threatening process was submitted by several community groups in 2017. The loss of mature native trees (including hollow bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment has since been listed as a key threatening process under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. → →Vegwatch, a monitoring program run by the Molonglo Catchment Group since 2012, adopts consistent techniques outlined in Sharp and Gould (2014) to monitor the effects of change such as weed control, burns and other management activities. Currently ten woodland (including secondary grassland) sites are monitored as part of this program. → →Publication of Woodland Flora, a Field Guide for the Southern Tablelands (NSW and ACT), which covers 444 Southern Tableland species across the broader ACT region (Sharp et al., 2015). BASELINE INFORMATION Survey and mapping projects since the 2004 Strategy have improved our understanding of the distribution of a range of vegetation types across the ACT. Major projects are listed below. → →Classification of 41 vegetation communities in the ACT according to the classification system developed by Armstrong et al. (2013). → →A comprehensive map of vegetation in the ACT was completed in 2018 using aerial photography. Structural attributes of the vegetation (e.g. tree height, crown cover and shrub cover) were added using data derived from Light Imaging Ranging and Detection. Mapped vegetation communities include those described by Armstrong et al. (2013), one previously.
PART A 77 undescribed woodland community (see Baines et al. (2013)), and 20 modified vegetation types. The mapping was completed between 1:3 000 and 1:10 000 scale. It is available to the public on ACTMapi and is being used to inform management activities and modelling of ecological processes. → →Weed infestation and control work within reserves mapped using the Collector Application. Weed mapping undertaken by community members using the Weed Spotter website and associated application has also contributed to the knowledge of the distribution of weeds. → →Surveys undertaken as part of Environmental Offset requirements have improved distribution maps of a range of woodland biodiversity values, including threatened species. These surveys aim to track the extent and condition of communities, and the occurrence / abundance of threatened species through time. → →Description and mapping of soil landscapes across the ACT by the NSW Office of Environment and Heritage. Fifty five soil landscapes were described (see Cook et al. (2016)) and a digital map was produced for use by land managers, planners and researchers. RESEARCH, MODELLING AND MONITORING Research projects undertaken in the ACT and surrounding region have improved our understanding of the function and value of woodlands and their primary threats in the ACT. Key research projects are listed below. DISTURBANCE, BIOMASS MANAGEMENT AND WOODLAND RESTORATION → →Several local research projects investigating the impact of high intensity grazing by native herbivores on: > > vegetation structure and species diversity and abundance (Driscoll, 2017; Manning et al., 2013; McIntyre et al., 2015; McIntyre et al., 2010; Snape et al., 2018; Vivian & Godfree, 2014) > > birds (Howland et al., 2016) > > invertebrates (Barton et al., 2011) > > reptiles (Howland et al., 2014). → →Research illustrating the importance of coarse woody debris in reducing the impacts of browsing pressure on vegetation in woodlands in the ACT (Stapleton et al., 2017). → →Research trials to develop an effective and efficient method for fertility control of Eastern Grey Kangaroos (ACT Government, 2018c). → →Trials of disturbance and restoration regimes to inform management of grasslands (and grassy woodlands), including improving habitat for threatened species. Management techniques include fire, grazing, slashing, rock placement and complementary weed and pest animal control. → →Research in Namadgi and other National Parks within the Australian Alps investigating fuel hazard and flammability in subalpine woodland and forests (Dixon et al., 2018b; Zylstra, 2018). → →Research investigating the interaction between dieback severity of Blakely’s Red Gum and time since fire, landscape position and stand structure (i.e. regeneration density) in the ACT. → →As part of a PhD thesis, Darren Le Roux investigated the future availability of large old trees around Canberra (Le Roux et al., 2014a) and policy options to retain habitat structures in urban areas (Le Roux et al., 2014b), the impact on bird diversity of replacing single large trees with several small trees (Le Roux et al., 2015), factors influencing use of artificial nest boxes (Le Roux et al., 2016a) and the failure of nest boxes to attract native hollow nesting birds to small- and medium-sized trees (Le Roux et al., 2016b). THREATENED SPECIES → →Monitoring and on-ground activities undertaken by the ACT Government to better understand and conserve threatened woodland vegetation species, as detailed in respective action plans (Part B). These include: > > Monitoring of Small Purple Pea and Tarengo Leek Orchid populations since 2001 and 1991, respectively. Long-term data will allow for the effective analysis of population trends and identification of relationships with management activities and other impacts (including climate change). > > Monitoring threats to Canberra Spider Orchid populations and implementing management interventions when required. → →Research into a failed reintroduction of the Brown Treecreeper and implications for woodland restoration (Bennett et al., 2012a; Bennett et al., 2012b, 2013a; Bennett et al., 2013b).
78 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY WOODLAND BIRDS → →Analysis of long term monitoring data and population trends for woodland birds, including the seven species listed as threatened in the ACT (Barrett et al., 2007; Rayner, 2014). → →Research investigating the response of woodland birds to various habitat features (Stagoll et al., 2010), the urban interface (Ikin et al., 2014a; Ikin et al., 2013a; Ikin et al., 2013b) and large trees in urban areas (Stagoll et al., 2012). → →Intensive nest monitoring of Superb Parrots in Canberra to assess the number of pairs displaying breeding behaviour within the Gungahlin and Molonglo Strategic Assessment Areas and to monitor competitive interactions with other hollow nesting species (Rayner et al., 2015b, 2016). This research contributes to our understanding of site fidelity, breeding success, and the habitat and breeding requirements of the Superb Parrot. CLIMATE CHANGE → →Modelling by the ACT Government to identify climate refugia for vegetation across the ACT (Mackenzie et al., 2018). The model-predicted future distribution of vegetation is informing current management activities undertaken by the ACT Government (e.g. such as fire management and restoration activities). → →A spatial multi-criteria analysis, which aims to improve understanding of the factors associated with dieback across the ACT, was recently completed for the ACT Government (Cowood et al., 2018). → →Research and modelling into the likely impacts of climate change on structure, processes and biodiversity of temperate grasslands and grassy woodland communities across southeast Australia (Prober et al., 2012a). → →Research illustrating the importance of several factors for successful ecological restoration in a changing climate (Prober et al., 2014a; Prober et al., 2014b). → →Analysis of genetic variability in Yellow Box remnant and restoration sites (including sites in northern ACT and north of the ACT border) (Broadhurst, 2013). Broadhurst’s (2013) paper discusses the relationship between the genetic variability of vegetation at these sites and the likelihood they will successfully adapt to the impacts of climate change. → →The genetic diversity of two Yellow Box seed production areas were evaluated to determine if the harvestable seed contains sufficient genetic diversity to supply effective future restoration projects (Broadhurst et al., 2015). → →Development of a trial by CSIRO (for the ACT Government) to test the suitability of seeds of Blakely’s Red Gum, sourced from local populations and the broader region, to ACT’s present and predicted future climate conditions. Information from the provenance trial will inform potential management activities to mitigate the impact of climate change and dieback on Blakely’s Red Gum. This may include the selection and breeding of dieback resistant individuals, assisted migration and genetic enrichment of natural populations HABITAT CONNECTIVITY → →Landscape modelling, undertaken by Manning et al. (2010), to identify priority places to improve habitat connectivity across the ACT. The analysis mapped the location of habitat links across the region, identified key considerations and issues for land planning and management and proposed a range of remedial and future actions. Habitat connectivity models and guidelines to ensure adequate connectivity for species (including woodland specialists) within the ACT were further developed by (Barrett & Love, 2012) and later by Doerr et al. (2014b). Mapping products and recommendations produced from these projects have been used in town planning and have guided revegetation projects. → →Love et al. (2015) identified areas across the South East Local Land Services region (including the ACT) where maintaining or improving connectivity of native vegetation will best support woodland dependant (and other) species most sensitive to landscape fragmentation..
PART A 79 MONITORING → →The development of the CEMP in 2017 as a framework for monitoring the condition of ecosystems across the ACT network. The program gathers information from various monitoring programs and qualitative sources across government and non-government groups to make assessments of reserve condition and to evaluate the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation outcomes. The CEMP ensures information is available to support adaptive, evidence-based decision making into the future. A monitoring plan for native woodlands is currently under development. → →The impact of Sambar Deer on vegetation structure and composition in montane forests and woodlands in the Cotter Catchment is being monitored by the ACT Government. Surveys commenced in 2014-2015 and data collected will inform future management decisions (see Mulvaney et al. (2017)). → →The ACT Government is monitoring the effects of thinning (according to benchmark densities outlined in Gibbons et al. (2010)) on the structural diversity and growth rates of woody species within a lowland woodland site at Isaacs Ridge offset area. → →The ACT Government has undertaken long-term monitoring of lowland grasslands and woodlands since 2009. This includes measuring species richness and structural characteristics. As part of the 5 year collaborative woodland enhancement and connectivity program, additional monitoring sites are being developed to identify management priorities and track changes in habitat condition. → →The ACT Government is undertaking research to better understand the response of subalpine woodland ecosystems to fire. Vegetation structural dynamics and patterns of fauna diversity are being recorded at monitoring plots throughout Namadgi National Park that have experienced different fire regimes. Ecological insights from this research informs fire management activities undertaken by the ACT Government. → →Monitoring is undertaken at all offset sites, which together include over 650 ha of box-gum woodland, to understand if management objectives are being achieved and if changes to management are required. This includes monitoring the ecological condition of box-gum woodland and monitoring the population status of threatened species. → →The ACT Government undertakes annual monitoring of feral pig populations in Namadgi National Park to estimate local populations to inform control activities → →Biannual surveys to monitor rabbit populations across a number of grassland and woodland sites within Canberra Nature Park. Monitoring tracks long term trends in rabbit abundance and informs rabbit control activities..
80 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 5. APPENDICES 5.1. LOWLAND AND SUBALPINE WOODLAND COMMUNITIES IN THE ACT NAME STRUCTURE CONDITION AND THREATS LOCATION CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE SUBALPINE u22. Mountain Gum – Snow Gum ± Robertson’s Peppermint grass-forb very tall woodland to open forest of the Australian Alps and South Eastern Highlands bioregions Tall dense canopy (grading to open forest) dominated by Eucalyptus dalrympleana and Eucalyptus pauciflora subsp. pauciflora. Midstorey variable (may be absent) with dense grass and herbaceous ground cover, usually dominated by Poa sieberiana. → →Most of this community is below its prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Extensive areas burnt in 2003, resulting in a dense cover of vegetation in the 1-3 m height class → →Well represented in the ACT reserve system → →865 – 1588 m asl → →Widespread on ridges and slopes of the Gugdgenby, Corin, Bendora, Paddy’s River and Cotter catchments u23. Snow Gum – Drumstick Heath – Leptospermum myrtifolium tall woodland to open forest of drainage depressions primarily of the South Eastern Highlands bioregion Mid-high dense canopy (grading to open forest) dominated by E. pauciflora subsp. pauciflora, E. dalrympleana and Eucalyptus stellulata. Well-developed shrub layer (including Epacris breviflora, Leptospermum myrtifolium and Hakea macrocarpa) and diverse ground cover. → →Most of the community is below its prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Primary current threats include invasive plants → →Well represented in the ACT reserve system → →931-1707 m asl → →Very patchy distribution on lower slopes and sheltered areas, including the Paddy’s River, Bendora, and Gudgenby catchments u27. Snow Gum – Candlebark tall grassy woodland in frost hollows and gullies of the South Eastern Highlands bioregion Tall canopy dominated by E. pauciflora subsp. pauciflora often with Eucalyptus rubida, and occasionally with Eucalyptus dives, Eucalyptus bridgesiana or Eucalyptus viminalis. Dense grass and herbaceous ground cover. → →Most of the community is below its prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Approximately 70% of extent was burnt in 2003, resulting in a dense cover of vegetation in the 1-3 m height class → →Well represented in the ACT reserve system → →890-1558 m asl → →Mid to lower slopes and valley floors on ranges and frost hollow depressions, including Gudgenby, Naas and Corin catchments → →This community is part of an Endangered Ecological Community (Tablelands Snow Gum, Black Sallee, Candlebark and Ribbon Gum Grassy Woodland in the South Eastern Highlands, Sydney Basin, South East Corner and NSW South Western Slopes bioregions) listed under the NSW Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 u28. Snow Gum – Mountain Gum – Daviesia mimosoides tall dry grass-shrub subalpine open forest of the Australian Alps and South Eastern Highlands bioregions Tall canopy (grading to open forest) dominated by E. pauciflora subsp. pauciflora and E. dalrympleana. Shrubby, diverse midstorey (often dominated by D. mimosoides and Oxylobium elipticum). Diverse groundcover dominated by P. sieberiana. → →Approximately 90% of this community is below its prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Extensive areas burnt in 2003, resulting in a lower canopy height than less disturbed systems → →Well represented in the ACT reserve system → →978-1582 m asl → →Widely distributed on ridges, summits and slopes, including the Corin, Gudgenby, Bendora, Lower Cotter, Naas and Paddy’s River catchments u118. Black Sallee grass-herb woodland in drainage depressions and moist valley flats in the South Eastern Highlands and Australian Alps bioregions Tall canopy dominated by E. stellulata and occasional E. rubida and/or E. pauciflora subsp. pauciflora. Moderate shrub layer (often including Hakea microcarpa and Leptospermum spp.) and dense groundlayer with a diversity of forbs and low shrubs between grass tussocks.
 → →Approximately 70% of this community is below its prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Well represented in the ACT reserve system → →972-1400 m asl → →Narrow bands on the footslopes of drainage depressions and valleys in the Naas, Gudgenby, Corin and Paddy’s River catchments → →This community is part of an Endangered Ecological Community (Tablelands Snow Gum, Black Sallee, Candlebark and Ribbon Gum Grassy Woodland in the South Eastern Highlands, Sydney Basin, South East Corner and NSW South Western Slopes bioregions) listed under the NSW Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995.
PART A 81 NAME STRUCTURE CONDITION AND THREATS LOCATION CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE SUBALPINE u158. Alpine Sallee shrub-grass subalpine mid- high woodland of the Australian Alps bioregion Low to tall canopy dominated by E. pauciflora subsp. niphophila, E. pauciflora subsp. debeuzevillei and Eucalyptus glaucescens. Shrubs, grasses and forbs create a diverse groundlayer, often including Hovea montana, Acrothamnus hookeri, Acrothamnus montanus, Poa phillipsiana and Stellaria pungens. → →Much of this community is below the prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Majority of extent burnt in 2003, resulting in a very dense shrub layer → →Entire distribution protected within ACT reserve system → →1005-1553 m asl → →Very patchy distribution on exposed and rocky summits and ridges, primarily along the Tidbinbilla Range in the Lower Cotter, Bendora and Paddy’s River catchments. → →Isolated patches occur in the Gudgenby catchment u207. Jounama Snow Gum – Snow Gum shrubby mid-high woodland on granitoids primarily of the Namadgi region Low to tall canopy dominated by E. pauciflora subsp. debeuzevillei and E. pauciflora subsp. pauciflora. Diverse, shrubby midstorey including Tasmannia xerophila, Podolobium alpestre, Daviesia ulicifolia, Oxylobium ellipticum and Hovea montana. Groundlayer includes a diverse suite of grass and herb species. → →Majority of extent burnt in 2003 and is likely to be well below its prescribed minimum tolerable fire interval → →Entire distribution protected within ACT reserve system → →1297-1910 m asl → →Primarily located on the highest ridges of the Brindabella Range, including the Corin and Bendora Catchments LOWLAND (INCLUDING HILLSLOPES AND FOOTHILLS) q6. Red box tall grass-shrub woodlands Tall canopy dominated by E. polyanthemos with occasional E. blakelyi, E. melliodora, E. bridgesiana and E. nortonii. Midstorey ranges from diverse to sparse (including species such as Bursaria spinosa, Kunzea ericoides and A. dealbata). Ground layer varies from moderate to sparse. → →Approximately 50% of the community is above its prescribed maximum tolerable fire interval → →Historic grazing has resulted in a simplified mid and ground cover and inhibited recruitment of canopy species → →Many old trees have been removed for use as firewood → →Some areas have been converted to derived grasslands → →Current threats include invasive plants → →Largely confined to the ACT → →Fragmented distribution across hills, ridges and mid-slopes, primarily within the Kambah, Tharwa, Woolshed, Fyshwick and Kowen catchments u19. Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box ± White Box tall grassy woodland of the Upper South Western Slopes and western South Eastern Highlands bioregions Tall canopy dominated by E. blakelyi and/or E. melliodora. Sparse or absent shrub layer often comprised of regenerating Eucalypts, Acacia species or B. spinosa. Groundlayer includes a range of grass and forb species. Undisturbed sites have a greater diversity of forbs; degraded areas are dominated by less palatable, robust species. → →Approximately 40% of the community is above its prescribed maximum tolerable fire interval → →Historic grazing has resulted in a simplified mid and ground cover and inhibited recruitment of canopy species → →Few areas remain in good, intact condition and some areas have been converted to derived grasslands → →Extensive areas suffer from dieback and have sparse to very sparse canopy cover → →Current threats include dieback, grazing (native and non-native), urbanisation and invasive plants → →Widespread across gently sloping country in most catchments north of Mt Tennent and north-east of the Murrumbidgee River This community is part of the: → →Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland listed as endangered under the Nature Conservation Act (ACT) 1980 → →White Box Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland listed as Critically Endangered under the EPBC Act 1999. → →White Box Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland listed under the NSW TSC Act 1995..
82 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY NAME STRUCTURE CONDITION AND THREATS LOCATION CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE LOWLAND (INCLUDING HILLSLOPES AND FOOTHILLS) u178.Yellow Box – Apple Box tall grassy woodland of the South Eastern Highlands Tall canopy dominated by E. melliodora and/ or E. bridgesiana, occasionally with E. blakelyi or E.rubida along creeklines and in moist depressions. Sparse (or absent) shrub layer primarily comprised of Acacia spp., B. spinosa and K. ericoides. Dense groundlayer of grasses and forbs. → →Approximately 40% of the community is above its prescribed maximum tolerable fire interval → →Historic grazing has resulted in a simplified mid and ground cover and inhibited recruitment of canopy species → →Few areas remain in good, intact condition → →Extensive areas suffer from dieback and have sparse to very sparse canopy cover → →Current primary threats include dieback, grazing (native and non-native), urbanisation and invasive plants → →A significant proportion of extent is within the ACT → →Widespread across variable topography, from valley floors to ridges, including the Naas Kowen and Uriarra and Coppins catchments This community is part of the: → →Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland listed as endangered under the Nature Conservation Act (ACT) 1980 → →White Box Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland listed as Critically Endangered under the EPBC Act 1999. → →White Box Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland listed under the NSW TSC Act 1995. p520. Ribbon Gum very tall woodland on alluvial soils along drainage lines of the eastern South Eastern Highlands bioregion Very tall canopy dominated by E. viminalis and occasionally E. bridgesiana, E. rubida or E. pauciflora. Sparse to moderate shrub layer (often comprised of A. dealbata, A. melanoxylon or K. ericoides) and grassy groundlayer. Areas that have suffered severe disturbance have little to no native ground cover → →Most of this community is below its prescribed maximum tolerable fire interval → →Historic grazing has resulted in a simplified mid and ground cover, altered hydrology and inhibited recruitment of canopy species → →Most areas are in low to moderate condition → →Current primary threats include invasive plants and dieback → →Well represented in the ACT reserve system → →Fragmented distribution along alluvial flats adjacent to larger drainage lines, primarily in the Naas, Gudgenby and Tharwa catchments → →This community is part of an Endangered Ecological Community (Tablelands Snow Gum, Black Sallee, Candlebark and Ribbon Gum Grassy Woodland in the South Eastern Highlands, Sydney Basin, South East Corner and NSW South Western Slopes bioregions) listed under the NSW Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 u78. Snow Gum Grassy mid-high woodland of the South Eastern Highlands bioregion Low to tall canopy dominated by E pauciflora subsp. pauciflora occasionally with E. bridgesiana and / or E. rubida. Sparse to moderate shrub layer (including K. ericoides, B. spinosa and A. delabata) and dense groundlayer including a variety of grasses and forbs. Heavily grazed remnants are dominated by less- palatable species such. → →Over 70% of the community is the same fire age class → →Historic grazing has resulted in a simplified mid and ground cover, altered hydrology and inhibited recruitment of canopy species → →Current primary threats include invasive plants and grazing → →Rare → →Over 60% of this community is within rural lands → →Fragmented distribution across areas where cold air accumulates overnight (varied topography). → →Largest remnants are located in the Paddy’s River catchment in the Tidbinbilla Valley, Mt Ainslie-Majura and Aranda bushland → →This community is part of an Endangered Ecological Community (Tablelands Snow Gum, Black Sallee, Candlebark and Ribbon Gum Grassy Woodland in the South Eastern Highlands, Sydney Basin, South East Corner and NSW South Western Slopes bioregions) listed under the NSW Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995.
PART A 83 5.2. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES IDENTIFIED IN THIS STRATEGY RANKED BY CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE* = High = Medium = Low = Not currently applicable *Considers extent and severity of threat / issue, emerging issues, conservation goals, and data deficiencies. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE RETAIN AND PROTECT NATIVE WOODLANDS Ensure no net loss of the ecological and cultural values of woodlands in the ACT. Maintain or improve the proportion of each woodland community located within the ACT’s formal reserve system Identify opportunities to improve representation of lowland Snow Gum woodland (u78) and Red Box tall grass-shrub woodland (q6) in the ACT’s formal reserve system. All species of woodland flora and fauna should be represented by viable, wild populations that will enable the species to be conserved for perpetuity. The ACT Government will continue to support regional and national effort towards the conservation of these species. Improve understanding of the distribution of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community in the ACT and aim to protect all remaining areas from unintended impacts Prioritise the protection and ongoing management of woodland that contributes to threatened species conservation (as outlined in respective action plans and conservation advice, Part B). Identify opportunities to protect and enhance the values of woodlands outside the reserve system, guided by relevant policy and legislation and in collaboration with non-government agencies, the Commonwealth Government and community members After feasible and appropriate avoidance and mitigation measures have been undertaken, manage the impact of residential and commercial development on woodlands according to the Environmental Offsets Policy and those strategies outlined in Section 1.2. MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF URBANISATION Mitigate impacts of existing urban development on adjacent woodland habitat (cont. pg. 21). Mitigate impacts of future urban development on woodland areas by (cont. pg. 21)..
84 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF OVERGRAZING Manage macropod densities according to the Controlled Native Species Management Plan for Eastern Grey Kangaroos (ACT Government, 2017b), the Kangaroo Management Plan (ACT Government, 2010a), and other subsidiary documents. Continue the trial of dart-delivered GonaCon on kangaroos in Canberra Nature Park (CNP) and continue to assess the long-term effectiveness of dart-delivered GonaCon on fecundity. Ensure future culling programs are informed by the outcomes of this program. Undertake activities, including restoration and herbage mass management techniques, to maintain, wherever possible a heterogeneous mosaic of grazing intensity by native herbivores, and at least some pasture that is at a level palatable to macropod and other native herbivores. Continue long-term monitoring of the interaction between vegetation and principal herbivores in grasslands and grassy woodlands to inform ongoing management. Consider actions to enhance woody debris (including fine woody components) to reduce browsing pressure in woodland areas where naturally occurring debris is deficient (see: Stapleton et al. (2017)). Work with rural landholders to support the maintenance and enhancement of woodland values, including protection from overgrazing (as outlined in Section 2.1). Reduce the impact of overgrazing from non-native herbivores according to ACT Government (2012a). FIRE MANAGEMENT Undertake strategic prescribed burning and other fuel reduction activities within woodlands to protect human life and property, maintain species diversity and minimise species’ losses according to the ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plan Use the best available ecological knowledge to evaluate and make decisions regarding balancing asset protection and woodland biodiversity conservation. As part of planning for prescribed burning, take appropriate measures to mitigate potential negative ecological impacts. Lead and support research to improve our understanding of the responses of fauna and flora to different fire regimes in the ACT..
PART A 85 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE Facilitate and support cross-tenure fire management planning and activities (including with rural landholders and NSW land managers). Where it is consistent with objectives to reduce the risk to human life and property, increase the diversity of subalpine woodland post fire age classes. Priority activities include: protecting areas of long unburned subalpine woodlands from fire for the foreseeable future and identifying areas of subalpine woodland to transition to older post-fire age classes (cont. pg. 26). Develop weed management strategies for fire management when there is a likelihood of invasive species responding positively to burning (e.g. English Broom [Cytisus scoparius], African Lovegrass [Eragrostis curvula], Cootamundra Wattle, and Oxeye Daisy [Leucanthemum vulgare]) and Nodding Thistle [Carduus nutans]). Facilitate community education initiatives to improve understanding of the complexities of fire management in the ACT and the use of fire to manage woodland biodiversity. Undertake robust monitoring and evaluation to assess the ecological (and human life and property protection) outcomes of planned fire management activities and unplanned fire events. In accordance with ACT Government (2015a), protect cultural sites during fire management activities and work in collaboration with Traditional Custodians and the broader Aboriginal community to plan, implement and monitor cultural burns in woodlands. MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF INVASIVE PLANTS Manage established invasive species according to the ACT Weeds Strategy 2009 -2019 (ACT Government, 2009) (note, a revised ACT Weeds Strategy is currently in development) and annual Invasive Plants Operations Plans. Prevent costly, erratic invasive plant control by ensuring long term, regular funding for targeted management. Reduce the likelihood of new plant invasions by prioritising management activities that detect and efficiently eradicate emerging species (cont. pg. 30). Where eradication of a species is not feasible, prioritise management actions to protect significant cultural and ecological assets from further invasion. When required, undertake staged removal of woody weeds and plan and implement revegetation (e.g. with fast growing native shrubs) to maintain critical habitat for fauna in the absence of complex habitat structure..
86 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE Facilitate and support cross-tenure management of invasive plants where relevant. As part of control programs, monitor the changes in abundance of invasive plants and their impacts on woodlands. Continue to use and promote digital technologies to assist in the systematic recording of invasive species distribution and control activities and use this information to monitor changes in the area and density of infestations. Keep up to date with new control methods and emerging technologies to inform best practice invasive plant species management. CONTROL PEST ANIMALS Prevent costly, erratic pest animal control by ensuring long-term, regular funding for targeted pest management, according to the ACT Pest Animal Strategy 2012-2022 (ACT Government, 2012a). Reduce the impact of pest animals by prioritising management activities that detect and efficiently manage emerging pest species (cont. pg. 32). Where eradication of a species is not feasible, prioritise management actions to protect significant cultural and ecological assets from further impacts. Facilitate and support cross-tenure management of pest animals. Consider the interactions between ecosystem processes, threatening processes and management activities during the development and implementation of control programs. Lead and support research to improve our understanding of the relationship between pest animal abundance/density and environmental impacts. Based on research findings, develop management actions that target actual, rather than perceived, impacts. For all control programs, develop and maintain a robust monitoring program to track changes in the abundance of pest animals and the impact they cause to woodland values. Develop management triggers for the control of pest animals that are informed by both the abundance of an animal and its environmental impact. Facilitate community education and participation in pest animal management to maintain community support for pest animal control and to improve efficiencies of control work through cross- tenure management..
PART A 87 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE Lead and support research to identify and test innovative control methods and emerging technologies in the space of pest animal control to inform best-practice management. Maintain local, regional and national research collaborations (including the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions). MITIGATE THE IMPACTS OF DIEBACK Continue to lead and support research and modelling to improve our understanding of the relationship between: dieback and fire (including prescribed burning), the abundance and impact of insects and fungal pathogens, soil moisture and condition, vegetation density, and land use. Building on the work undertaken by Cowood et al. (2018), continue to map tree canopies using remote sensing methods and undertake associated modelling and analysis to track changes in the condition of trees in lowland woodland communities over time (cont. pg. 36). Lead and support research to improve our understanding of the susceptibility of individual Eucalyptus trees to dieback (including investigations into genetic variability and seed provenance trials [see Section 4]). Undertake and support restoration activities that enhance a system’s resilience to climate change and other disturbances (see Section 1.3), and encourage regeneration and establishment of Eucalyptus trees. Management actions that aim to mitigate the impacts of dieback are informed by emerging ideas and research undertaken in the ACT and in Eucalyptus woodland communities across Australia. MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE Improve understanding of: the predicted impacts of climate change on woodland-associated fauna and flora, future climate refugia for woodland communities and potential colonisation sites for associated biodiversity (cont. pg. 38). Monitor the long-term response of species (that are characteristic of woodland communities) to climate change. Use monitoring data to inform the selection of thresholds above or below which management actions should be triggered. Identify management priorities and protect sites identified as significant refugia (and potential colonisation sites) for woodland species. As outlined in Section 1.3, woodland restoration activities will consider future climate impacts and will aim to enhance a system’s ability to adapt to changing conditions..
88 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE Collaborate with local, regional, state and federal stakeholders to undertake research, management activities, and facilitate community awareness raising and knowledge sharing between all parties. MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE HABITAT FEATURES AND HABITAT HETEROGENEITY Enforce policy and undertake management action to retain large, mature trees and other critical woodland habitat features (e.g. mistletoe) across all tenures. Undertake plantings and introduce habitat elements to restore soil health, increase woodland extent, enhance functional woodland connectivity and enhance habitat for target fauna species. The prioritisation and planning of restoration projects should: define site and landscape-scale goals, evaluate the appropriateness and cost-effectiveness of assisted natural regeneration to meet objectives otherwise addressed through revegetation and other active regeneration activities, be informed by the best available knowledge (cont. pg. 42). Work closely with rural landholders and other local land managers to plan and undertake restoration activities to maintain and improve habitat features and contribute to landscape-scale restoration, as outlined in Section 2.1. Ensure long term funding for ongoing management and / or monitoring of restoration sites. If there is conflict between habitat management for two or more threatened species, consideration must be given to abundance, habitat specialisation, functional traits, mobility, adaptability and the ACT and National conservation status of the species. The nature of ongoing threats, and how important the site is to the conservation of the species must also be considered. Seek to improve our understanding of aboveground-belowground linkages to inform effective restoration techniques. This includes: knowledge of species-specific symbiotic relationships, management actions that are advantageous to soil communities and soil community structure (cont. pg. 43) Continue to support the work of community groups to undertake restoration activities (see Section 2) Continue to undertake and support research that informs restoration activities (see Section 3.1 and 4.8).
PART A 89 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE MANAGE HERBAGE MASS In the absence of knowledge regarding species-specific understorey habitat requirements, aim to maintain intermediate levels of herbage mass and a heterogeneous (or ‘patchy’) grassland structure at the reserve and / or landscape scale. Evaluate the risk and appropriateness of implementing different herbage mass techniques (fire, grazing or slashing / mowing) at a site, and compare with the risk of inaction. Develop ACT Government guidelines for the management of herbage mass within lowland woodlands (cont. pg. 46) Manage macropod densities (according to the guidelines outlined above) at sites where heavy macropod grazing is resulting in a substantial decline in herbage mass and structural heterogeneity. Undertake and support research and ongoing monitoring to evaluate the ecological, social and economic outcomes of controlled grazing by native herbivores and livestock. If there is conflict between herbage mass management for two or more threatened species, consideration must be given to abundance, habitat specialisation, functional traits, mobility, adaptability and the ACT and National conservation status of the species. The nature of ongoing threats, and how important the site is to the conservation of the species must also be considered. Livestock grazing for conservation purposes should only be used as a short-term tool to manage herbage mass on ACT Government managed land where the following criteria are met (cont. pg. 46). ENHANCE HABITAT CONNECTIVITY Projects aiming to maintain or enhance connectivity should: prioritise the protection and effective management of woodland patches, identify target species, and consider their requirements for functional connectivity, consider habitat connectivity at both a local and landscape scale (cont. pg. 47) Maintain isolated trees on and off reserve as ‘stepping stone’ connectivity, especially when revegetation is not feasible. Ensure the key east – west and north – south wildlife corridors across the ACT are maintained and where required, restored. Work with rural landholders and other land managers to improve connectivity of woodland habitat at a landscape scale..
90 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE COLLABORATE WITH RURAL LANDHOLDERS Work closely with rural landholders and their representative body, the Rural Landholders Association (RLA), to identify additional strategies to collaborate on projects and support landholders to protect and / or enhance woodland values on rural land (cont. pg 49). To effectively work with rural landholders, consideration must be given to: the diversity of priorities rural landholders have regarding the management of their properties, including the need to manage for production and profitability, mechanisms to maintain open communication and effective relationships, including ensuring appropriate levels of on-ground staff to support initiatives (cont. pg. 49) SUPPORT COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND RAISE COMMUNITY AWARENESS Collaborate with community groups to deliver woodland conservation activities (e.g. restoration activities) to address the priorities outlined in this Strategy. Support community groups to undertake on-ground and other projects through the provision of grants, advice and access to research and other knowledge. Agreements between the ACT Government and community groups to undertake shared management of sites will also be considered. Provide opportunities for community members to engage in volunteer activities, through for example the ParkCare program. Training and access to other ACT Government resources is critical to ensuring the sustainability of the ParkCare program and other volunteer activities as they are identified. Facilitate, and collaborate with external groups to deliver community education programs that engage the broader community (cont. pg. 51). Facilitate information and knowledge sharing between ACT Government staff, research organisations and community groups to encourage best practice management of woodlands (cont. pg. 52). Develop and maintain appropriate interpretative signage and other educational materials in reserves and other open spaces..
PART A 91 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE ENHANCE AND PROMOTE CITIZEN SCIENCE Explore opportunities for citizen science initiatives to meet conservation objectives outlined in this Strategy. Provide support to relevant community groups to plan projects and implement them. Encourage the systematic collection and effective use of data collected through citizen science projects by: supporting the management and use of digital information tools, ensuring data collected is subject to appropriate quality control, and supporting community groups to access grants, professional and technical advice, training and equipment. ENHANCE PARTICIPATION OF ABORIGINAL PEOPLE Work in collaboration with Aboriginal community members to manage and monitor woodlands and fill knowledge gaps regarding their long term conservation (cont. pg. 55). Support Traditional Custodians to access and use the landscape in accordance with Aboriginal Access to Country Cultural Guidelines (in development) (cont. pg. 56) Implement and / or collaborate with RAOs and other community groups to deliver activities (cont. pg. 56) SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE RECREATIONAL USE OF WOODLANDS Undertake effective monitoring of visitor impacts to inform a proactive and adaptive approach to visitor management. Undertake effective visitor management, as outlined in individual Reserve Management Plans, to minimise detrimental impacts on the natural and cultural values of woodlands. Effectively communicate with visitors to promote responsible and respectful use of woodland reserves, promote an understanding of woodland systems and their values, threats and required management, and advise visitors of community safety concerns such as wildfires and native animals (cont. pg. 57) Promote the sustainable use of woodland reserves and, where practical, reduce physical barriers to community access..
92 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE MONITOR WOODLAND CONDITION Employ the Woodland CEMP (in development) to guide monitoring priorities. Monitor changes in ecological condition, including the impacts of threats and the effectiveness of management actions in achieving conservation goals across the ACT. Continue to plan and implement monitoring programs to address ecological and management-related questions within woodlands across the ACT by: establishing monitoring programs with well- defined objectives, sound experimental design and effective data management and assessment standards, and seeking collaboration (cont. pg. 59) In line with action plans and conservation advice, monitor threatened, declining and rare species and the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community to: detect short-term changes in distribution or abundance that may require management intervention, and determine long-term trend and status in the ACT and broader region (cont. pg. 59). In planning monitoring programs, ensure long-term investment and sustained funding and resourcing beyond short-term cycles. Collaborate with community groups to collect and use monitoring data systematically and effectively by providing, for example: professional and technical advice, training, screening and analysis of data, data collection protocols, and support to access grants and equipment. Priority projects to improve baseline information include: on- ground assessment of the condition of large patches of lowland woodland and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland across the ACT, improve knowledge of fauna distribution and abundance in subalpine and lowland woodland (cont. pg. 61) DELIVER RESEARCH OUTCOMES Implement and support research projects to address knowledge gaps and answer ecological questions (priorities outlined above) to inform the management of woodlands. Continue to support the Mulligans Flat – Goorooyarroo Woodland experiment as a key research and learning site for woodland restoration and management throughout the ACT. Identify opportunities to partner with Traditional Custodians to develop research projects that can inform land management, resource use and other activities undertaken by Traditional Custodians in woodlands..
PART A 93 CONSERVATION OBJECTIVE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE LOWLAND SECONDARY GRASSLANDS SUBALPINE In line with action plans and conservation advice, undertake and support research into the ecology and conservation requirements of threatened species and communities including: habitat requirements and key resources, including distribution of key habitats, effects of habitat modification, land use practices, and key threats (cont. pg. 63) In planning and implementing research projects, maintain open dialogue between ACT Government policy, research and land management staff and when appropriate seek collaboration with non-government organisations to: identify and prioritise knowledge gaps for future research, inform research questions and project design (cont. pg. 63). Communicate research results to land managers, including non- government organisations through: research and technical reports published on ACT Government website and in scientific journals, social media platforms, workshops and seminars, presentations and meetings, and the production of educational resources. Candlebark (E. rubida), Namadgi National ParkCandlebark (E. rubida), Namadgi National Park.
94 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY 5.3 LIST OF ACRONYMS ACT AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ANBG Australian National Botanical Gardens ANZECC Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Counci BOP Bushfire Operations Plans CEMP Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program CIP Conservation Implementation Plan COG Canberra Ornithologists Group CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation EPBC Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature LCC Lower Cotter Catchment MARS Market Attitude and Research Services MRC Murrumbidgee River Corridor NSW New South Wales RAO Representative Aboriginal Organisations TFI Tolerable Fire Interval TRC Tourism Recreation Conservation Consultants WONS Weeds of National Significance YB-BRG Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum.
PART A 95 REFERENCES ACT Government. (2007a). The ACT climate change strategy: Action plan 2007 - 2011. Australian Capital Territory, Canberra: Department of Territory and Municipal Services. ACT Government. (2007b). Plan of management for urban open space and public access sportsgrounds in the Gungahlin region. Canberra Parks Conservation and Lands Territory and Municipal Services. ACT Government. (2009). ACT weeds strategy 2009 - 2019. Canberra: Department of Environment , Climate Change, Energy and Water. ACT Government. (2010a). ACT kangaroo management plan. Canberra: Territory and Municipal Services. ACT Government. (2010b). Namadgi National Park plan of management 2010. Canberra: Land Management and Planning Division, Department of Territory and Municipal Services. ACT Government. (2012a). ACT pest animal management strategy 2012 - 2022. Canberra: ACT Government. ACT Government. (2012b). Tidbinbilla plan of management 2012. Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve Birrigai. Canberra: Territory and Municiapl Services Directorate. ACT Government ACT Government. (2013a). ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23. Canberra: Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2013b). Hall Cemetery management plan. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2013c). Molongolo adaptive management strategy. Canberra: ACT Territory and Municipal Services. ACT Government. (2015a). Aboriginal cultural guidelines for fuel and fire management operations in the ACT. Canberra: ACT Parks and Conservation Service, Territory and Municipal Services. ACT Government. (2015b). Extension to the Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Nature Reserves pffset management plan (For the Throsby North, Throsby East and Kenny Broadacre Offset areas). Canberra: Territory and Municipal Services Directorate. ACT Government. (2015c). Kinlyside Nature Reserve and offset area offset Management Plan. Commitments 10 within the Gunghalin strategic assessment biodiversity plan. Canberra: Territory and Municipal Services Directorate ACT Government. (2015d). White Box - Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland condition improvement plan. A plan for the management, monitoring and improvement of White Box – Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grasslands in the Gungahlin strategic assessment area. Canberra: Economic Development Directorate / Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate ACT Government. (2016a). ACT Biosecurity Strategy 2016 - 2026. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2016b). Bonner 4 East Environmental Offset Site (extension to Mulligan’s Flat Nature Reserve) offset management plan (2016-2021). Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2016c). Offset management plan for the extension of the Pinnacle Nature Reserve. Final October 2016. Canberra: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. ACT Government. (2017a). ACT native grassland conservations strategy and action plans. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate..
96 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY ACT Government. (2017b). Eastern Grey Kangaroo: controlled native species management plan. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainability Directorate. ACT Government. (2017c). Isaacs Ridge Nature Reserve extension offset management plan. Canberra: ACT Parks and Conservation Service. ACT Government. (2017d). Nature conservation (Eastern Grey Kangaroo) rural culling calculator determination 2017 notifiable instrument NI2017–224. Canberra. ACT Government. (2017 unpublished data). Phytopthora testing results from ACT offset reserves. ACT Government. (2018a). ACT planning strategy – future directions for a sustainable, competitive and equitable city. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2018b). Annual compliance report. Residential development, Block 9 Section 64, Watsonm and extensions of Negus Crescent (EPBC 2012/6418). 30 November 2017 - 29 November 2018. Canberra: Environment Planning and Sustainable Development. ACT Government. (2018c). Fertility control of Eastern Grey Kangaroos in the ACT. Assessing efficacy of a dart-delivered immunocontraceptive vaccine. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2018d). Justice Robert Hope Park operational management plan 2018 - 2021. Canberra: ACT Parks and Conservation Service ACT Government. (2018e). Lower Cotter Catchment reserve management plan. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2018f). Nature conservation (Eastern Grey Kangaroo) conservation culling calculator determination 2018 notifiable instrument NI2018-141. Canberra. ACT Government. (2018g). Nature conservation (loss of mature native trees) conservation advice 2018. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate ACT Government. (2018h). Woodlands for wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodlands Conservation Strategy progress report. Canberra. ACT Government. (2019). Strategic bushfire management plan 2019-2024. Canberra: Emergency Services Agency. ACT Government. (2019a). Canberra’s living infrastructure plan: cooling the city. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Amos, J. N., Harrisson, K. A., Radford, J. Q., White, M., Newell, G., Nally, R. M., Sunnucks, P., & Pavlova, A. (2014). Species- and sex-specific connectivity effects of habitat fragmentation in a suite of woodland birds. Ecology, 95(6), 1556-1568. ANZECC. (1996). National strategy for the conservation of Australia’s biological diversity: Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council. Armstrong, R. C., Turner, K. D., McDougall, K. L., Rehwinkel, R., & Crooks, J. I. (2013). Plant communities of the upper Murrumbidgee Catchment in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. Cunninghamia, A Journal of Plant Ecology For Eastern Australia, 13(1), 125-266. Austin, M. P., Cawsey, E. M., Baker, B. L., Yialeloglou, M. M., Grice, D. J., & Briggs, S. V. (2000). Predicted vegetation cover in the Central Lachlan Region. Final report project AA 1368.97. A project conducted under the Bushcare Program of the Natural Heritage Trust. Canberra: CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology. Baines, G., Webster, M., Cook, E., Johnston, L., & Seddon, J. (2013). The vegetation of the Kowen, Majura and Jerrabomberra districts of the Australian Capital Territory. Technical report 28. Canberra: Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. Barnes, P., Wilson, B. R., Nadolny, C., & Growns, I. (2009). The influence of individual native trees and grazing regime on soil properties and groundcover patterns in a temperate landscape of New South Wales, Australia. The Rangeland Journal, 31(4), 405-415. Barnes, P., Wilson, B. R., Reid, N., Koen, T. B., Lockwood, P., & Lamb, D. W. (2011). Litterfall and associated nutrient pools extend beyond the canopy of scattered eucalypt trees in temperate pastures. Plant and Soil, 345(1), 339. Barratt, D. G. (1997). Predation by House Cats, Felis catus (L.), in Canberra, Australia. I. Prey composition and preference. Wildlife Research, 24(3), 263-277..
PART A 97 Barrett, G., Silcocks, A., Cunningham, R., Oliver, D., Weston, M., & Baker, J. (2007). Comparison of atlas data to determine the conservation status of bird species in New South Wales, with an emphasis on woodland-dependent species. Australian Zoologist, 34(1), 37-77. Barrett, T., & Love, J. (2012). Fine scale modelling of fauna habitat and connectivity values in the ACT region. Prepared for: Conservation Planning and Research, Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government: NSW Office of Environment and Heritage. Barton, P. S., Manning, A. D., Gibb, H., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Cunningham, S. A. (2009). Conserving ground-dwelling beetles in an endangered woodland community: Multi-scale habitat effects on assemblage diversity. Biological Conservation, 142(8), 1701-1709. Barton, P. S., Manning, A. D., Gibb, H., Wood, J. T., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Cunningham, S. A. (2011). Experimental reduction of native vertebrate grazing and addition of logs benefit beetle diversity at multiple scales. Journal of Applied Ecology, 48(4), 943. Barton, P. S., Sato, C. F., Kay, G. M., Florance, D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Effects of environmental variation and livestock grazing on ant community structure in temperate eucalypt woodlands. Insect Conservation and Diversity, 9(2), 124-134. Bennett, J. M., Clarke, R. H., Thomson, J. R., & Mac Nally, R. (2015). Fragmentation, vegetation change and irruptive competitors affect recruitment of woodland birds. Ecography, 38(2), 163-171. Bennett, V., Doerr, V., Doerr, E., Manning, A., & Lindenmayer, D. (2012a). The anatomy of a failed reintroduction: a case study with the Brown Treecreeper. Emu - Austral Ornithology, 112(4), 298-312. Bennett, V. A., Doerr, V. A. J., Doerr, E. D., Manning, A. D., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Yoon, H.-J. (2012b). Habitat selection and post-release movement of reintroduced Brown Treecreeper individuals in restored temperate woodland (species reintroduction and habitat selection). PLoS ONE, 7(12). Bennett, V. A., Doerr, V. A. J., Doerr, E. D., Manning, A. D., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Yoon, H.-J. (2013a). Habitat selection and behaviour of a reintroduced passerine: linking experimental restoration, behaviour and habitat ecology. PLoS ONE, 8(1). Bennett, V. A., Doerr, V. A. J., Doerr, E. D., Manning, A. D., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Yoon, H. J. (2013b). Causes of reintroduction failure of the brown treecreeper: implications for ecosystem restoration. Austral Ecology, 38(6), 700- 712. Bluff, L. (2016). Reducing the effect of planned burns on hollow-bearing trees. Fire and adaptive management report no. 95. Melbourne: Victoria Government, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning Bounds, J., Taws, N., & Cunningham, R. (2010). A statistical analysis of trends in occupancy rates of woodland birds in the ACT, December 1998 to December 2008: the ten-year data analysis. Canberra bird notes volume 35, number 3 December 2010. Canberra: Canberra Ornithologists Group. Bowdler, S. (1981). Hunters in the highlands: Aboriginal adaptations in the eastern Australian uplands. Archaeology in Oceania, 16(2), 99-111. Briggs, S., Taws, N., Seddon, J., & Vanzella, B. (2008). Condition of fenced and unfenced remnant vegetation in inland catchments in south-eastern Australia. Australian Journal of Botany, 56(7), 590-599. Broadhurst, L. M. (2013). A genetic analysis of scattered Yellow Box trees (Eucalyptus melliodora A.Cunn. ex Schauer, Myrtaceae) and their restored cohorts. Biological Conservation, 161(C), 48-57. Broadhurst, L. M., Fifield, G., Vanzella, B., & Pickup, M. (2015). An evaluation of the genetic structure of seed sources and the maintenance of genetic diversity during establishment of two Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) seed- production areas. Australian Journal of Botany, 63(5), 455-466. Canberra Ornithologist Group. (2018). Annual Bird Report. 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017. Canberra Bird Notes, 43(1). Carron, L. T. (1985). A history of forestry in Australia.
 NSW: Australian National University Press. Ciesla, W. M., & Donaubauer, E. (1994). Decline and dieback of trees and forests - a global overview. FAO forestry paper 120. Rome: Food and Agriculture Orgnization of the United Nations.
98 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Claridge, A. W., Mills, D. J., Hunt, R., Jenkins, D. J., & Bean, J. (2009). Satellite tracking of wild dogs in south-eastern mainland Australian forests: Implications for management of a problematic top-order carnivore. Forest Ecology and Management, 258(5), 814-822. Clark, L. R. (1962). The general bioloy of Cardiaspina albitextura (Psyllidae) and its abundance in relation to weather and parasitism. Australian Journal of Zoology, 10(4), 537-586. Clark, L. R., & Dallwitz, M. J. (1974). On the relative abundance of some Australian Psyllidae that coexist on Eucalyptus blakelyi. Australian Journal of Zoology, 22(3), 387-415. Close, D. C., Davidson, N. J., & Swanborough, P. W. (2011). Fire history and understorey vegetation: water and nutrient relations of Eucalyptus gomphocephala and E. delegatensis overstorey trees. Forest Ecology and Management, 262(2), 208-214. Close, D. C., Davidson, N. J., & Watson, T. (2008). Health of remnant woodlands in fragments under distinct grazing regimes. Biological Conservation, 141(9), 2395-2402. Cole, I. A., Prober, S., Lunt, I., & Koen, T. B. (2016). Nutrient versus seed bank depletion approaches to controlling exotic annuals in threatened Box Gum woodlands. Austral Ecology, 41(1), 40-52. Commonwealth Government. (2008). Threat abatement plan for predation by the European Red Fox. Canberra: Department of the Enviroment, Water, Heritage and the Arts. Commonwealth Government. (2009). Australia’s strategy for the National Reserve System 2009-2030. Canberra: Australian Government. National Reserve System Task Group. Commonwealth Government. (2010). National Recovery Plan for White Box - Yellow Box - Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Derived Native Grassland. Sydney. Commonwealth Government. (2011a). European Red Fox (Vulpes vulpes). Canberra: Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Commonwealth Government. (2011b). Feral deer. Canberra: Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Commonwealth Government. (2011c). Feral European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus). Canberra: Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Commonwealth Government. (2011d). Feral horse (Equus caballus) and feral donkey (Equus asinus). Canberra: Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Commonwealth Government. (2012). Development control plan 12/03 May 2012. Block 622. Majura Australian federal police training facility. Canberra: National Capital Authority. Commonwealth Government. (2015a). Intergovernmental memorandum of understanding. Agreement on a common assessment method for listing of threatened species and threatened ecological communities: Department of the Environment. Commonwealth Government. (2015b). Threat abatement plan for predation by feral cats. Canberra: Department of the Environment. Commonwealth Government. (2016a). Environmental strategy 2016 - 2036 version 1.0. Canberra: Department of Defence. Commonwealth Government. (2016b). National capital plan. Canberra: National Capital Authority. Commonwealth Government. (2017). Threat abatement plan for predation, habitat degradation, competition and disease transmission by feral pigs (Sus scrofa) (2017): Department of the Environment and Energy. Commonwealth Government. (2018). Australia’s strategy for nature (Draft) 2018-2030: The Department of Environment and Energy, on behalf of the Biodiversity Working Group. Cook, W., Jenkins, B., Young, M., Murphy, C., Milford, H. B., & Muller, R. (2016). Soil landscapes of the Australian Capital Territory. Queanbeyan, NSW: Office of Environment and Heritage. Corbett, L., & Newsome, A. (1987). The feeding ecology of the dingo. Oecologia, 74(2), 215-227. Costin, A. B. (1954). A study of the ecosystems of the Monaro Region of New South Wales. Sydney: A. H. Pettifer, Government Printer..
PART A 99 Cowood, A. L., Lynch, A. J. J., & Botha, J. (2018). Blakely’s Red Rum dieback in the ACT: report to the ACT Enviornment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Canberra: Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra. Coyne, P. (2000). Protecting the natural treasures of the Australian Alps: a report to the Natural Heritage Working Group of the Australian Alps Liaison Committee: Australian Alps Liaison Committee, Natural Heritage Working Group. Dickman, C. R. (1996). Overview of the impacts of feral cats on Australian native fauna. Prepared for the Australian Nature Conservation Agency: Institute of Wildlife Research and School of Biological Sciences, University of Sydney. Dixon, K. M., Cary, G. J., Worboys, G. L., & Gibbons, P. (2018a). The disproportionate importance of long-unburned forests and woodlands for reptiles. Ecology and Evolution, 8(22). Dixon, K. M., Cary, G. J., Worboys, G. L., Seddon, J., & Gibbons, P. (2018b). A comparison of fuel hazard in recently-burned and long-unburned forests and woodlands. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 27(9). Doerr, E. D., Doerr, V. A., Davies, M. J., & McGinness, H. M. (2014a). Does structural connectivity facilitate movement of native species in Australia’s fragmented landscapes?: a systematic review protocol. Environmental Evidence, 3(1), 9. Doerr, E. D., Doerr, V. A. J., Micah, J. D., Davey, C., & Allnutt, J. (2014b). Flyways & Byways: guiding restoration of wildlife corridors. Monitoring connectivity restoration in the Australian Capital Territory. Canberra: A report prepared for the Australian Capital Territory Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate. Dorrough, J., McIntyre, S., Brown, G., Stol, J., Barrett, G., & Brown, A. (2012). Differential responses of plants, reptiles and birds to grazing management, fertilizer and tree clearing. Austral Ecology, 37(5), 569-582. Dorrough, J., McIntyre, S., & Scroggie, M. P. (2011). Individual plant species responses to phosphorus and livestock grazing. Australian Journal of Botany, 59(7), 669-680. Dow, D. D. (1977). Indiscriminate interspecific aggression leading to almost sole occupancy of space by a single species of bird. Emu, 77(3), 115-121. Driscoll, D. A. (2017). Disturbance maintains native and exotic plant species richness in invaded grassy woodlands. Journal of Vegetation Science, 28(3), 573-584. Driscoll, D. A., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bennett, A. F., Bode, M., Bradstock, R. A., Cary, G. J., Clarke, M. F., Dexter, N., Fensham, R., Friend, G., Gill, M., James, S., Kay, G., Keith, D. A., Macgregor, C., Possingham, H. P., Russel-Smith, J., Salt, D., Watson, J. E. M., Williams, D., & York, A. (2010). Resolving conflicts in fire management using decision theory: asset- protection versus biodiversity conservation. Conservation Letters, 3(4), 215-223. Eco Logical Australia. (2010). Offset Delivery Plan: Prepared for ACTEW Corporation. Edwards, P., Wanjura, W., & Brown, W. (1993). Selective herbivory by Christmas Beetles in response to intraspecific variation in Eucalyptus terpenoids. Oecologia, 95(4), 551-557. Eldridge, D., & Wong, V. (2005). Clumped and isolated trees influence soil nutrient levels in an Australian temperate box woodland. Plant and Soil, 270(1), 331-342. Environment Australia. (2000). Revision of the interim biogeographic regionalisation for Australia (IBRA) and development of version 5.1. Summary Report. Canberra: National Reserves Section, Environment Australia. Faithfull, I. G. (2012). Biodiversity impacts of Chilean needle grass Nassella neesiana on Australia’s indigenous grasslands. (Hons., Victoria University, Melbourne). Retrieved from http://vuir.vu.edu.au/19944/ Fearnside, A., Shirley, J. W., & Sharp, S. (2012). The Hughes Garran Woodland - A draft management plan. Canberra. Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2002). Small patches can be valuable for biodiversity conservation: two case studies on birds in southeastern Australia. Biological Conservation, 106(1), 129-136. Fischer, J., Stott, J., & Law, B. S. (2010). The disproportionate value of scattered trees.
 Biological Conservation, 143(6), 1564-1567. Foster, C. N., Barton, P. S., Robinson, N. M., MacGregor, C. I., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2017). Effects of a large wildfire on vegetation structure in a variable fire mosaic. Ecological applications: a publication of the Ecological Society of America. Gellie, N. J. H. (2005). Native vegetation of the southern forests: South-East Highlands, Australian Alps, South-West Slopes, and SE Corner bioregions. Cunninghamia, 9(2), 219-254..
100 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Gherlenda, A. N., Esveld, J. L., Hall, A. A. G., Duursma, R. A., & Riegler, M. (2016). Boom and bust: rapid feedback responses between insect outbreak dynamics and canopy leaf area impacted by rainfall and CO2. Global Change Biology, 22(11), 3632-3641. Gibbons, P., & Boak, M. (2002). The value of paddock trees for regional conservation in an agricultural landscape. Ecological Management & Restoration, 3(3), 205-210. Gibbons, P., Briggs, S. V., Murphy, D. Y., Lindenmayer, D. B., McElhinny, C., & Brookhouse, M. (2010). Benchmark stem densities for forests and woodlands in south-eastern Australia under conditions of relatively little modification by humans since European settlement. Forest Ecology and Management, 260(12), 2125-2133. Goddard, M. A., Ikin, K., & Lerman, S. B. (2017). Ecological and social factors determining the diversity of birds in residential yards and gardens. Ecology and conservation of birds in urban environments: Springer International Publishing. Godfree, R., Firn, J., Johnson, S., Knerr, N., Stol, J., & Doerr, V. (2017). Why non-native grasses pose a critical emerging threat to biodiversity conservation, habitat connectivity and agricultural production in multifunctional rural landscapes. Landscape Ecology, 32(6), 1219. Goldin, S., & Hutchinson, M. (2013). Coarse woody debris modifies surface soils of degraded temperate eucalypt woodlands. Plant and Soil, 370(1), 461-469. Goldin, S. R., & Brookhouse, M. T. (2015). Effects of coarse woody debris on understorey plants in a temperate A ustralian woodland. Applied Vegetation Science, 18(1), 134-142. Grarock, K., Tidemann, C., Wood, J., & Lindenmayer, D. (2014). Understanding basic species population dynamics for effective control: a case study on community-led culling of the common myna (Acridotheres tristis). Biological Invasions, 16(7), 1427-1440. Grey, M. J., Clarke, M. F., & Loyn, R. H. (1997). Initial changes in the avian communities of remnant eucalypt woodlands following a reduction in the abundance of Noisy Miners, Manorina melanocephala. Wildlife Research, 24(6), 631-648. Hagger, V., Dwyer, J., Shoo, L., & Wilson, K. (2018). Use of seasonal forecasting to manage weather risk in ecological restoration. Ecological applications: a publication of the Ecological Society of America. Hall, A. A. G., Gherlenda, A. N., Hasegawa, S., Johnson, S. N., Cook, J. M., & Riegler, M. (2015). Anatomy of an outbreak: the biology and population dynamics of a Cardiaspina psyllid species in an endangered woodland ecosystem. Agricultural and Forest Entomology, 17(3), 292-301. Hamonts, K., Bissett, A., Macdonald, B. C. T., Barton, P. S., Manning, A. D., & Young, A. (2017). Effects of ecological restoration on soil microbial diversity in a temperate grassy woodland. Applied Soil Ecology, 117-128. Hannan, L., Le Roux, D. S., Milner, R. N. C., & Gibbons, P. (2019). Erecting dead trees and utility poles to offset the loss of mature trees. Biological Conservation, 236, 340-346. Hobbs, R. J., & Humphries, S. E. (1995). An integrated approach to the ecology and management of plant invasions. Conservation Biology, 9(4), 761-770. Hovenden, M. J., & Williams, A. L. (2010). The impacts of rising CO 2 concentrations on Australian terrestrial species and ecosystems. Austral Ecology, 35(6), 665-684. Howland, B., Stojanovic, D., Gordon, I. J., Manning, A. D., Fletcher, D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2014). Eaten out of house and home: impacts of grazing on ground-dwelling reptiles in Australian grasslands and grassy woodlands. PLoS ONE, 9(12). Howland, B., Stojanovic, D., Gordon, I. J., Radford, J., Manning, A. D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Birds of a feather flock together: Using trait-groups to understand the effect of macropod grazing on birds in grassy habitats.
 Biological Conservation, 194, 89-99. Hughes, L., & Westoby, M. (1994). Climate change and conservation policies in Australia: coping with change that is far away and not yet certain. Pacific Conservation Biology, 1(4), 308-318. Icon Water. (2017). Murrumbidgee to Googong landscape rehabilitation and terrestrial ecology management plan version 5. Canberra: Icon Water..
PART A 101 Ikin, K., Barton, P., Knight, E., Lindenmayer, D., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. (2014a). Bird community responses to the edge between suburbs and reserves. Oecologia, 174(2), 545-557. Ikin, K., Barton, P. S., Stirnemann, I. A., Stein, J. R., Michael, D., Crane, M., Okada, S., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2014b). Multi- scale associations between vegetation cover and woodland bird communities across a large agricultural region. PLoS ONE, 9(5). Ikin, K., Beaty, R., Lindenmayer, D., Knight, E., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. (2013a). Pocket parks in a compact city: how do birds respond to increasing residential density? Landscape Ecology, 28(1), 45-56. Ikin, K., Knight, E., Lindenmayer, D. B., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. D. (2013b). The influence of native versus exotic streetscape vegetation on the spatial distribution of birds in suburbs and reserves. Diversity and Distributions, 19(3), 294-306. Ikin, K., Mortelliti, A., Stein, J., Michael, D., Crane, M., Okada, S., Wood, J., & Lindenmayer, D. (2015). Woodland habitat structures are affected by both agricultural land management and abiotic conditions. Landscape Ecology, 30(8), 1387-1403. Jarrad, F., Wahren, C.-H., Williams, R., & Burgman, M. (2009). Subalpine plants show short-term positive growth responses to experimental warming and fire. Australian Journal of Botany, 57(6), 465-473. Johnson, D. P., Catford, J. A., Driscoll, D. A., & Gibbons, P. (2018). Seed addition and biomass removal key to restoring native forbs in degraded temperate grassland. Applied Vegetation Science, 21(2), 219-228. Johnston, F. M., & Pickering, C. M. (2001). Alien plants in the Australian Alps. Mountain Research and Development, 21(3), 284-291. Jones, D. N., & Reynolds, S. J. (2008). Feeding birds in our towns and cities: a global research opportunity. Journal of Avian Biology, 39(3), 265. Jurskis, V., & Turner, J. (2002). Eucalypt dieback in eastern Australia: a simple model. Australian Forestry, 65(2), 87-98. Kardol, P., & Wardle, D. A. (2010). How understanding aboveground–belowground linkages can assist restoration ecology. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 25(11), 670-679. Kay, G., Florance, D., Wood, J., & Lindenmayer, D. (2013). Environmental stewardship box gum grassy woodland monitoring project - final monitoring report for the Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities (SEWPAC). Canberra: Fenner School of Environment and Society, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment. Kay, G. M., Mortelliti, A., Tulloch, A., Barton, P., Florance, D., Cunningham, S. A., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2017). Effects of past and present livestock grazing on herpetofauna in a landscape-scale experiment. Conservation Biology, 31(2), 446-458. Keith, H., Vardon, M., Stein, J. A., Stein, J. L., & Lindenmayer, D. (2017). Ecosystem accounts define explicit and spatial trade-offs for managing natural resources. Nature Conservation & Ecology, 1(11), 1683. Kenis, M., Auger-Rozenberg, M.-A., Roques, A., Timms, L., Péré, C., Cock, M., Settele, J., Augustin, S., & Lopez-Vaamonde, C. (2009). Ecological effects of invasive alien insects. Biological Invasions, 11(1), 21-45. Killey, P., McElhinny, C., Rayner, I., & Wood, J. (2010). Modelling fallen branch volumes in a temperate eucalypt woodland: implications for large senescent trees and benchmark loads of coarse woody debris. Austral Ecology, 35(8), 956-968. Landsberg, J. (2000). Status of temperate woodlands in the Australian Capital Territory. In R. J. Hobbs & C. J. Yates (Eds.), Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia. NSW: Surrey Beatty & Sons PTY Limited. Landsberg, J. J., Morse, J., & Khanna, P. K. (1990). Tree dieback and insect dynamics in remnants of native woodlands on farms.
 Proceedings of the Ecologial Society of Australia 1990, 16, 149-165. Le Roux, D., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D., Manning, A., & Gibbons, P. (2014a). The future of large old trees in urban landscapes. PLoS ONE, 9(6). Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bistricer, G., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2016a). Effects of entrance size, tree size and landscape context on nest box occupancy: Considerations for management and biodiversity offsets. Forest Ecology and Management, 366, 135-142..
102 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bistricer, G., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2016b). Enriching small trees with artificial nest boxes cannot mimic the value of large trees for hollow-nesting birds. Restoration Ecology, 24, 252-258. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Blanchard, W., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2014b). Reduced availability of habitat structures in urban landscapes: Implications for policy and practice. Landscape and Urban Planning, 125, 57-64. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2015). Single large or several small? Applying biogeographic principles to tree-level conservation and biodiversity offsets. Biological Conservation, 191, 558-566. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2018). The value of scattered trees for wildlife: Contrasting effects of landscape context and tree size. Diversity and Distributions, 24(1), 69-81. Leigh, J., Wimbush, D., Wood, D., Holgate, M. D., Slee, A., Stanger, M., & Forrester, R. (1987). Effects of rabbit grazing and fire on a subalpine environment. I. Herbaceous and shrubby vegetation. Australian Journal of Botany, 35(4), 433-464. Lindenmayer, D., Lane, P., Barton, P., Crane, M., Ikin, K., Michael, D., & Okada, S. (2016). Long-term bird colonization and turnover in restored woodlands. Biodiversity and Conservation, 25(8), 1587-1603. Lindenmayer, D. B., Burns, E. L., Tennant, P., Dickman, C. R., Green, P. T., Keith, D. A., Metcalfe, D. J., Russell-Smith, J., Wardle, G. M., Williams, D., Bossard, K., Delacey, C., Hanigan, I., Bull, C. M., Gillespie, G., Hobbs, R. J., Krebs, C. J., Likens, G. E., Porter, J., & Vardon, M. (2015). Contemplating the future: Acting now on long-term monitoring to answer 2050’s questions. Austral Ecology, 40(3), 213-224. Lindsay, E. A., & Cunningham, S. A. (2009). Livestock grazing exclusion and microhabitat variation affect invertebrates and litter decomposition rates in woodland remnants. Forest Ecology and Management, 258(2), 178. Love, J., Taylor, S., Drielsma, M., Rehwinkel, R., & Moyle, K. (2015). Southern Rivers NRM Stream 1 Habitat and Connectivity Modelling Project. The Mapping of Fauna Habitat and Connectivity Values in the South East Local Land Services area. NSW: Office of Environment and Heritage and University of New England. Lowman, M. D., & Heatwole, H. (1987). The impact of defoliating insects on the growth of eucalypt saplings. Australian Journal of Ecology, 12(2), 175-181. Lunt, I. D. (2005). Technical report 18. Effects of stock grazing on biodiversity values in temperate native grasslands and grassy woodlands in SE Australia: A literature review. Canberra: Environment ACT. Lunt, I. D., Prober, S. M., & Morgan, J. W. (2012). How do fire regimes affect ecosystem structure, function and diversity in grasslands and grassy woodland of southern Australia? In R. A. Bradstock, A. M. Gill, & R. Williams (Eds.), Flammable Australia. Fire regimes, biodiversity and ecosystems in a changing world. Victoria: CSIRO Publishing. Lutze, J. L., Roden, J. S., Holly, C. J., Wolfe, J., Egerton, J. J. G., & Ball, M. C. (1998). Elevated atmospheric [CO 2] promotes frost damage in evergreen tree seedlings. Plant, Cell & Environment, 21(6), 631-635. Mackenzie, J., Baines, G., Johnston, L., & Seddon, J. (2018). Draft Technical Report. Identifying biodiversity refugia under climate change in the ACT and region. Unpublished Report: Conservation Research. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Manning, A. D., Cunningham, R. B., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2013). Bringing forward the benefits of coarse woody debris in ecosystem recovery under different levels of grazing and vegetation density.
 Biological Conservation, 157, 204-214. Manning, A. D., Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2006). Scattered trees are keystone structures – implications for conservation. Biological Conservation, 132(3), 311-321. Manning, A. D., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Cunningham, R. B. (2007). A study of coarse woody debris volumes in two box- gum grassy woodland reserves in the Australian Capital Territory. Ecological Management & Restoration, 8(3), 221- 224. Manning, A. D., Shorthouse, D. J., Stein, J. L., & Stein, J. A. (2010). Ecological connectivity for climate change in the ACT and surrounding region. Technical Report 21. Canberra: The Australian National University. Manning, A. D., Wood, J. T., Cunningham, R. B., McIntyre, S., Shorthouse, D. J., Gordon, I. J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2011). Integrating research and restoration: the establishment of a long-term woodland experiment in south-eastern Australia. Australian Zoologist, 35(3)..
PART A 103 MARS. (2017). ACT sportsgrounds, parks and open spaces usage and satisfaction survey – open space management community feedback. Final detailed report 2016/2017 findings. NSW. McArdle, S. L., Nadolny, C., & Sindel, B. M. (2004). Invasion of native vegetation by Coolatai Grass Hyparrhenia hirta: Impacts on native vegetation and management implications. Pacific Conservation Biology, 10(1), 49-56. McDougall, A., Milner, R., Driscoll, D., & Smith, A. (2016). Restoration rocks: integrating abiotic and biotic habitat restoration to conserve threatened species and reduce fire fuel load. Biodiversity and Conservation, 25(8), 1529- 1542. McElhinny, C., Lowson, C., Schneemann, B., & Pachón, C. (2010). Variation in litter under individual tree crowns: Implications for scattered tree ecosystems. Austral Ecology, 35(1), 87-95. McIntyre, S. (2011). Ecological and anthropomorphic factors permitting low-risk assisted colonization in temperate grassy woodlands. Biological Conservation, 144(6), 1781-1789. McIntyre, S., Cunningham, R. B., Donnelly, C. F., & Manning, A. D. (2015). Restoration of eucalypt grassy woodland: effects of experimental interventions on ground-layer vegetation. Australian Journal of Botany, 62(7), 570-579. McIntyre, S., & Lavorel, S. (1994). Predicting richness of native, rare, and exotic plants in response to habitat and disturbance variables across a variegated landscape. Conservation Biology, 8(2), 521-531. McIntyre, S., Stol, J., Harvey, J., Nicholls, A. O., Campbell, M., Reid, A., Manning, A. D., & Lindenmayer, D. (2010). Biomass and floristic patterns in the ground layer vegetation of box-gum grassy eucalypt woodland in Goorooyarroo and Mulligans Flat Nature Reserves, Australian Capital Territory. Cunninghamia, 11(3), 319-357. McIvor, J., Bray, S., Grice, T., Hunt, L., & Scanlan, J. (2011). Grazing management options for improving profitability and sustainability. 1. New insights from experiments. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Northern Beef Research Update Conference. Meers, B. T., & Adams, R. (2003). The impact of grazing by Eastern Grey Kangaroos (Macropus giganteus) on vegetation recovery after fire at Reef Hills Regional Park, Victoria. Ecological Management & Restoration, 4(2), 126-132. Molsher, R., Newsome, A. E., Newsome, T. M., & Dickman, C. R. (2017). Mesopredator management: Effects of Red Fox control on the abundance, diet and use of space by feral cats. PLoS ONE, 12(1). Montague-Drake, R., Lindenmayer, D., Cunningham, R., & Stein, J. (2011). A reverse keystone species affects the landscape distribution of woodland avifauna: a case study using the Noisy Miner (Manorina melanocephala) and other Australian birds. Landscape Ecology, 26(10), 1383-1394. Moore, R. M. (1970). South-eastern Temperate Woodlands and Grasslands. In R. M. Moore (Ed.), Australian Grasslands (pp. 169-190). Canberra: Australian National University Press. Morgan, J. W. (1998). Importance of Canopy Gaps for Recruitment of some Forbs in Themeda triandra-dominated Grasslands in South-eastern Australia. Australian Journal of Botany, 46(6), 609-627. Morgan, J. W. (2015). Biomass management in native grasslands. In N. S. G. Williams, A. Marshall, & J. W. Morgan (Eds.), Land of sweeping plains. Managing and restoring the native grasslands of south-eastern Australia. Victoria: CSIRO Publishing. Mortelliti, A., Fagiani, S., Battisti, C., Capizzi, D., & Boitani, L. (2010). Independent effects of habitat loss, habitat fragmentation and structural connectivity on forest-dependent birds. Diversity and Distributions, 16(6), 941-951. Mulvaney, J., Seddon, J., & Orgill, O. (2017). Monitoring impacts of Sambar Deer (Rusa unicolour) on forests in the Cotter Catchment, ACT monitoring design and initial findings. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. Neary, D. G., Klopatek, C. C., Debano, L. F., & Ffolliott, P. F. (1999). Fire effects on belowground sustainability: a review and synthesis.
 Forest Ecology and Management, 122(1), 51-71. Neave, H. M., & Tanton, M. T. (1989). The effects of grazing by kangaroos and rabbits on the vegetation and the habitat of other fauna in Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve, Australian Capital Territory. Australian Wildlife Research, 16, 337-351. Ng, K., Barton, P., Macfadyen, S., Lindenmayer, D., & Driscoll, D. (2018). Beetle’s responses to edges in fragmented landscapes are driven by adjacent farmland use, season and cross-habitat movement. Landscape Ecology, 33(1), 109-125..
104 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY NSW Government. (2002). Threatened species information - Competition from Feral Honeybees as a key threatening process: National Parks and Wildlife Service. Oldland, J. M., Taylor, R. S., & Clarke, M. F. (2009). Habitat preferences of the noisy miner (Manorina melanocephala) – a propensity for prime real estate? Austral Ecology, 34(3), 306-316. Pell, A. S., & Tidemann, C. R. (1997). The Ecology of the Common Myna in urban nature reserves in the Australian Capital Territory. Emu - Austral Ornithology, 97(2), 141-149. Penman, T. D., Binns, D. L., Shiels, R. J., Allen, R. M., & Penman, S. H. (2011). Hidden effects of forest management practices: responses of a soil stored seed bank to logging and repeated prescribed fire. Austral Ecology, 36(5), 571- 580. Pettit, N. E., Froend, R. H., & Ladd, P. G. (1995). Grazing in remnant woodland vegetation: changes in species composition and life form groups. Journal of Vegetation Science, 6(1), 121-130. Portas, T. J., Cunningham, R. B., Spratt, D., Devlin, J., Holz, P., Batson, W., Owens, J., & Manning, A. D. (2016). Beyond morbidity and mortality in reintroduction programmes: changing health parameters in reintroduced eastern bettongs Bettongia gaimardi. 50(4), 674-683. Prober, S., Hilbert, D., Ferrier, S., Dunlop, M., & Gobbett, D. (2012a). Combining community-level spatial modelling and expert knowledge to inform climate adaptation in temperate grassy eucalypt woodlands and related grasslands. Biodiversity and Conservation, 21(7), 1627-1650. Prober, S., Lunt, I., & Thiele, K. (2008). Effects of fire frequency and mowing on a temperate, derived grassland soil in south-eastern Australia. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 17(5), 586-594. Prober, S., Stol, J., Piper, M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Cunningham, S. (2014a). Towards climate-resilient restoration in mesic eucalypt woodlands: characterizing topsoil biophysical condition in different degradation states. Plant and Soil, 383(1), 231-244. Prober, S., Thiele, K., Rundel, P., Yates, C., Berry, S., Byrne, M., Christidis, L., Gosper, C., Grierson, P., Lemson, K., Lyons, T., Macfarlane, C., O’Connor, M., Scott, J., Standish, R., Stock, W., Etten, E., Wardell-Johnson, G., & Watson, A. (2012b). Facilitating adaptation of biodiversity to climate change: a conceptual framework applied to the world’s largest Mediterranean-climate woodland. Climatic Change, 110(1), 227-248. Prober, S., & Wiehl, G. (2011). Resource heterogeneity and persistence of exotic annuals in long-ungrazed Mediterranean-climate woodlands. Biological Invasions, 13(9), 2009-2022. Prober, S. M., Ebyrne, M., Mclean, E., H, Steane, D., A, Potts, B., M, Vaillancourt, R., E, & Stock, W., D. (2015). Climate- adjusted provenancing: a strategy for climate-resilient ecological restoration. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 3. Prober, S. M., & Lunt, I. D. (2009). Restoration of Themeda australis swards suppresses soil nitrate and enhances ecological resistance to invasion by exotic annuals. Prober, S. M., Stol, J., Piper, M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Cunningham, S. A. (2014b). Enhancing soil biophysical condition for climate-resilient restoration in mesic woodlands. Ecological Engineering, 71, 246-255. Prober, S. M., & Thiele, K. R. (1995). Conservation of the grassy white box woodlands: relative contributions of size and disturbance to floristic composition and diversity of remnants. Australian Journal of Botany, 43(4), 349-366. Pulsford, S. A., Barton, P. S., Driscoll, D. A., Kay, G. M., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2018). Reptiles and frogs use most land cover types as habitat in a fine-grained agricultural landscape. Austral Ecology. Pulsford, S. A.
, Driscoll, D. A., Barton, P. S., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2017). Remnant vegetation, plantings and fences are beneficial for reptiles in agricultural landscapes. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54(6), 1710-1719. Ramalho, C. E., Laliberté, E., Poot, P., & Hobbs, R. J. (2014). Complex effects of fragmentation on remnant woodland plant communities of a rapidly urbanizing biodiversity hotspot. Ecology, 95(9), 2466-2478. Rawlings, K., Freudenberger, D., & Carr, D. (2010). A guide to managing box gum grassy woodlands: Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and Arts. Rayner, L. (2014). Conserving woodland birds: the need for population data in evidence-based planning (PhD thesis Australian National University, Canberra)..
PART A 105 Rayner, L., Ikin, K., Evans, M. J., Gibbons, P., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Manning, A. D. (2015a). Avifauna and urban encroachment in time and space. Diversity and Distributions, 21(4), 428-440. Rayner, L., Lindenmayer, D. B., Wood, J. T., Gibbons, P., & Manning, A. D. (2014). Are protected areas maintaining bird diversity? Ecography, 37(1), 43-53. Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R., & Manning, A. (2015b). Technical Report. Breeding ecology of the superb parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra. Nest Monitoring Report 2015. Retrieved from: http://www.environment. act.gov.au/cpr/conservation-research/report_series Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R., & Manning, A. (2016). Technical Report. Breeding ecology of the superb parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra. Nest Monitoring Report 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.environment. act.gov.au/cpr/conservation-research/report_series Reid, N., & Landsberg, J. (2000). Tree decline in agricultural landscapes: what we stand to lose. Temperate eucalypt woodland in Australia. NSW: Surrey Beatty & Sons. Roetman, P. E. J., Gilles, C., Pecl, G., & Sbrocchi, C. (2014). Overview of citizen science in Australia. Presented at the inaugural meeting of the Citizen Science Network, Brisbane, Australia, 6 May 2014. In G. Pecl, C. Gillies, C. Sbrocchi, & P. Roetman (Eds.), Building Australia through citizen science. Occassional Paper Series Issue 11 July 2015: Australian Government. Office of the Chief Scientist. Ross, C., & Brack, C. (2015). Eucalyptus viminalis dieback in the Monaro region, NSW. Australian Forestry, 1-11. Salmona, J., Dixon, K. M., & Banks, S. C. (2018). The effects of fire history on hollow-bearing tree abundance in montane and subalpine eucalypt forests in southeastern Australia. Forest Ecology and Management, 428, 93-103. Sato, C. F., Wood, J. T., Stein, J. A., Crane, M., Okada, S., Michael, D. R., Kay, G. M., Florance, D., Seddon, J., Gibbons, P., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Natural tree regeneration in agricultural landscapes: The implications of intensification. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 230, 98-104. Saunders, D. A., Hobbs, R. J., & Margules, C. R. (1991). Biological consequences of ecosystem fragmentation: a review. Conservation Biology, 5(1), 18-32. Schutz, A. J., & Driscoll, D. A. (2008). Common reptiles unaffected by connectivity or condition in a fragmented farming landscape. Austral Ecology, 33(5), 641-652. Scott, P. M., Burgess, T. I., Barber, P. A., Shearer, B. L., Stukely, M. J. C., Hardy, G. E. S. J., & Jung, T. (2009). Phytophthora multivora sp. nov., a new species recovered from declining Eucalyptus, Banksia, Agonis and other plant species in Western Australia. Persoonia - Molecular Phylogeny and Evolution of Fungi, 22(1), 1-13. Sharp, S. (2009). Conservation Management Plans for sites managed by the National Capital Authority (Yarramundi Grassland, Stirling Park Woodland, Yarralumla, Guilfoyle St Grassland, Yarralumla, Lady Denman Drive Grassland, Yarralumla). Report to the National Capital Authority. Canberra. Sharp, S. (2016). Ecological management plan for National Capital Authority Conservation Areas. Report to the National Capital Authority, April 2016. Canberra. Sharp, S., & Gould, L. (2014). ACT region vegwatch manual : vegetation and habitat condition assessment and monitoring for community. Canberra: Molongolo Catchment Group. Sharp, S., Rehwinkel, R., Mallinson, D., & Eddy, D. (2015). Woodland Flora: a field guide for the Southern Tablelands (NSW and ACT). Canberra: Friends of Grasslands. SMEC. (2014). Barrer box-gum woodland restoration plan. Prepared for territory and municipal services. Canberra, ACT. SMEC. (2016). ACT box - gum woodland offset monitoirng 2016: Prepared for: Parks and Conservation / Urban Reserves. Reference no. 3002505. SMEC. (2018).
 Ginningderry development offset management plan Lyneham ACT: Prepared for Riverview Property (ACT) Pty Ltd. Smith, A. L., Barrett, R. L., & Milner, R. N. C. (2018). Annual mowing maintains plant diversity in threatened temperate grasslands. Applied Vegetation Science, 21(2), 207-218. Snape, M., Caley, P., Baines, G., & Fletcher, D. (2018). Kangaroos and conservation: assessing the effects of kangaroo in lowland grassy ecosystems. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate..
106 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Specht, R. L. (1970). Vegetation. In G. W. Leeper (Ed.), The Australian Environment (pp. 44-67). Melbourne: CSIRO and Melbourne University Press. Spooner, P., Lunt, I., & Robinson, W. (2002). Is fencing enough? The short-term effects of stock exclusion in remnant grassy woodlands in southern NSW. Ecological Management & Restoration, 3(2), 117-126. Stagoll, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Knight, E., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. D. (2012). Large trees are keystone structures in urban parks. Conservation Letters, 5(2), 115. Stagoll, K., Manning, A. D., Knight, E., Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2010). Using bird–habitat relationships to inform urban planning. Landscape and Urban Planning, 98(1), 13-25. Standards Reference Group. (2017). National standards for the practice of ecological restoration in Australia. Second Edition: Society for Ecological Restoration Australasia (SERA). Stapleton, J. P., Ikin, K., & Freudenberger, D. (2017). Coarse woody debris can reduce mammalian browsing damage of woody plant saplings in box-gum grassy woodlands. Ecological Management & Restoration, 18(3), 223-230. Steinbauer, M. J., Sinai, K. M. J., Anderson, A., Taylor, G. S., & Horton, B. M. (2015). Trophic cascades in bell miner- associated dieback forests: Quantifying relationships between leaf quality, psyllids and Psyllaephagus parasitoids. Austral Ecology, 40(1), 77-89. Stol, J., & Prober, S. M. (2015). Jewels in the Landscape: Managing very high conservation value ground-layers in Box- Gum Grassy Woodland. Canberra: CSIRO Land and Water Flagship. Stone, C., & Bacon, P. (1994). Relationships among moisture stress, insect herbivory, foliar cineole content and the growth of river red gum “Eucalyptus camaldulensis”. The Journal of Applied Ecology, 31(4), 604. Taws, N., Bounds, J., Rowell, A., & Cunningham, R. (2011). An analysis of bird occupancy and habitat changes at six woodland locations - 2003 and 2010. Canberra: Canberra Ornithologist Group Taylor, R., Oldland, J., & Clarke, M. (2008). Edge geometry influences patch-level habitat use by an edge specialist in south-eastern Australia. Landscape Ecology, 23(4), 377-389. Thackway, R., & Cresswell, I. D. (1995). An interim biogeographic regionalisation for Australia: A framework for setting priorities in the national reserves system cooperative program. Version 4. Canberra: Australian Nature Conservation Agency. Threatened Species Scientific Committee. (2013). Advice to the Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population & Communities from the Threatened Species Scientific Committee (the Committee) on Amendments to the List of Key Threatening Processes under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). Timbal, B., Abbs, D., Bhend, J., Chiew, F., Church, J., Ekström, M., Kirono, D., Lenton, A., Lucas, C., McInnes, K., Moise, A., Monselesan, D., Mpelasoka, F., Webb, L., & Whetton, P. (2015). Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions: Cluster Reports, (M. Ekström, P. Whetton, C. Gerbing, M. Grose, L. Webb, & J. Risbey Eds.). Australia: CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology. Tommerup, I. C., & Bougher, N. L. (2000). The role of ectomycorrhizal fungi in nutrient cycling in temperate Australian woodlands. Biology, conservation, management and restoration. In R. Hobbs & C. Yates (Eds.), Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia. NSW: Surrey Beatty & Sons PTY Limited. Townsend, M. (2006). Feel blue? Touch green! Participation in forest/woodland management as a treatment for depression. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 5(3), 111-120. TRC Tourism. (2016). Draft management plan west belconnen conservation reserve 2016 - 2021. Draft November 2016. Retrieved from: https://ginninderry.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/WEST-BEL-DRAFT-MANAGEMENT- PLAN-011116.pdf TRC Tourism. (2018).
 Ginninderry Conservation Corridor 2018 - 2023 Management Plan. Prepared for Riverview Projects ACT. Tulloch, A. I. T., Mortelliti, A., Kay, G. M., Florance, D., & Lindenmayer, D. (2016). Using empirical models of species colonization under multiple threatening processes to identify complementary threat-mitigation strategies. Conservation Biology, 30(4), 867-882..
PART A 107 Vesk, P. A., Nolan, R., Thomson, J. R., Dorrough, J. W., & Nally, R. M. (2008). Time lags in provision of habitat resources through revegetation. Biological Conservation, 141(1), 174-186. Vivian, L. M., & Godfree, R. C. (2014). Relationships between vegetation condition and kangaroo density in lowland grassy ecosystems of the northern Australian Capital Territory: analysis of data 2009, 2010 and 2013. Australia: CSIRO. Wardell-Johnson, G., Stone, C., Recher, H., & Lynch, A. J. J. (2005). A review of eucalypt dieback associated with bell miner habitat in south-eastern Australia. Australian Forestry, 68(4), 231-236. Watson, D. M. (2002). Effects of mistletoe on diversity: a case-study from southern New South Wales. Emu - Austral Ornithology, 102(3), 275-281. White-Monsant, A., Clark, G., Chuen, M. N. K., Camac, J., Wang, X., Papst, W., & Tang, C. (2015). Experimental warming and fire alter fluxes of soil nutrients in sub-alpine open heathland. Climate Research, 64(2), 159-171. White, T. C. R. (1969). An index to measure weather-induced stress of trees associated with outbreaks of Psyllids in Australia. Ecology, 50(5), 905-909. Williams, K., Parer, I., Coman, B., Burley, J., & Braysher, M. (1995). Managing vertebrate pests: rabbits. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. Williamson, G. J., Murphy, B. P., & Bowman, D. M. J. S. (2014). Cattle grazing does not reduce fire severity in eucalypt forests and woodlands of the Australian Alps. Austral Ecology, 39(4), 462-468. Wilson, N., Cary, G. J., & Gibbons, P. (2018). Relationships between mature trees and fire fuel hazard in Australian forest. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 27(5), 353-362. Wilson, N., Seddon, J., & Baines, G. (2016). Factors influencing a population of the Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta). Unpublished Report: Conservation Research. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Wimbush, D. J., & Forrester, R. I. (1988). Effects of rabbit grazing and fire on a subalpine environment. II. Tree vegetation. Australian Journal of Botany, 36(3), 287-298. Windsor, D. M. (2000). A review of A review of factors affecting regeneration of box woodlands in the Central Tablelands of New South Wales. In R. J. Hobbs & C. J. Yates (Eds.), Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia: Biology, Conservation, Management and Restoration (pp. 271 - 185). NSW: Surrey Beatty & Sons. Yates, C., & Hobbs, R. (1997). Temperate eucalypt woodlands: A review of their status, processes threatening their persistence and techniques for restoration. Australian Journal of Botany, 45(6), 949-973. Yates, C. J., & Hobbs, R. J. (2000). Temperate eucalypt woodlands in Australia – an overview. In R. J. Hobbs & C. J. Yates (Eds.), Temperate Eucalypt Woodlands in Australia: Biology, Conservation, Management and Restoration. NSW: Surrey Beatty & Sons PTY Limited. Zylstra, P. (2013). The historical influence of fire on the flammability of subalpine Snowgum forest and woodland. The Victorian Naturalist, 130(6), 232. Zylstra, P. J. (2018). Flammability dynamics in the Australian Alps. Austral Ecology, 43(5), 578-591..
PART B ACTION PLANS.
PART B 111 YELLOW BOX–BLAKELY’S RED GUM GRASSY WOODLAND ENDANGERED ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITY ACTION PLAN.
PART B 113 PREAMBLE Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland was declared an endangered ecological community on 19 May 1997 (Instrument No. DI1997-89 Nature Conservation Act 1980; Appendix A). Under section 101 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing a draft action plan for listed ecological communities. The first action plan for this ecological community was prepared in 1999 (ACT Government 1999). This revised edition supersedes all previous editions. In this action plan, ‘Endangered YB-BRG Woodland’ refers specifically to remnants of the federally listed (EPBC Act 1999) Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland endangered ecological community. Reference to ‘YB-BRG Woodland’ encompasses areas of Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland that may not meet all criteria for listing as an endangered ecological community, but contain critical components of the community, thereby retaining biodiversity values worthy of management action. Measures proposed in this action plan complement those proposed in the action plans for Natural Temperate Grassland, and for component threatened species that occur in Box-Gum woodland: Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta), Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii), and Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum), available at the ACT Government’s Environment website. CONSERVATION STATUS Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland is declared a threatened ecological community according to the following legislation: → →National: Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Critically Endangered). → →Australian Capital Territory: Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Endangered). → →New South Wales: Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016 (Endangered). CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES The overarching goal of this action plan is to conserve Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (hereafter Endangered YB-BRG Woodland) in perpetuity as a viable ecological community across its geographic range in the ACT. This includes managing and restoring natural ecological and evolutionary processes within the community. Objectives of the action plan are to: 1. protect remaining areas of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from unintended impacts 2. maintain the ecological values of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland to promote ecosystem function and prevent biodiversity loss, including maintaining: 3. understorey structural and floristic diversity in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland 4. optimal habitat for threatened species, including keystone structures 5. improve the condition and ecological function of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland by undertaking restoration 6. improve understanding of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland ecology, restoration principles and best practice threat management 7. strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland..
114 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY COMMUNITY DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY DEFINITION AND DESCRIPTION The endangered YB-BRG Woodland community in the ACT meets the IUCN classification as an endangered ecological community and is a component of the federally listed, critically endangered White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is characterised by a discontinuous stratum of trees of medium height (10-35 m) with canopies that are separated and with 4-30% foliage cover. The community is dominated by Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi); Apple Box (Eucalyptus bridgesiana) and Candlebark (Eucalyptus rubida) are the most common co-dominant trees. Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is characterised by a species-rich understorey of native tussock grasses, herbs and scattered shrubs. Remnants of the community in good condition have a ground cover dominated (50% or more of the perennial species) by native grasses and forbs. The ground cover of remnants in lower condition may not be dominated by native species, yet retain a canopy of mature trees (20 or more per hectare on average) and/or support natural regeneration. Derived grasslands (also known as secondary grassland) are an expression of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland that develop when the tree canopy cover is removed (or suffers dieback), but a relatively diverse understorey remains intact. The size of YB-BRG Woodland remnant patches varies, but to be listed as part of the endangered ecological community a patch must be at least 0.1 ha. Endangered YB-BRG Woodland provides important habitat for a range of flora and fauna, including rare and threatened species (Table 1). Woodland areas that provide critical habitat for threatened species include: Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve (NR), Goorooyarroo NR, lower slopes of Mount Ainslie NR, Callum Brae NR, Kinlyside NR, Castle Hill, Tharwa, Upper Naas Valley, Newline Quarry, and Dunlop NR. Remnants of YB-BRG Woodland, including those in poorer condition, contain habitat attributes that support a diversity of fauna associated with, or dependant on, woodland ecosystems. Small patches are considered important if they retain a groundcover dominated by native species and a canopy dominated by Yellow Box or Blakely’s Red Gum, especially where mature trees are present. Maintaining and enhancing habitat features and keystone structures, including tree hollows, leaf litter, coarse woody debris, mistletoe, and bark complexity, contributes to the maintenance of biodiversity and on-going ecosystem function of YB-BRG Woodland in poorer condition. DISTRIBUTION In the ACT, Endangered YB-BRG Woodland occurs across several land tenures, including land managed by the ACT Government (e.g. reserves and urban open space), the Commonwealth Government, and private land holders (e.g. rural lease and agistment properties). The community persists on low-lying undulating plains in the north, and the rolling hills and valleys of the Naas Valley. Patches of YB-BRG Woodland persist at altitudes of 625 - 800 m above sea level and encompass two woodland communities described by Armstrong et al. (2013). These are: (1) Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box ± White Box tall grassy woodland of the Upper South Western Slopes and western South Eastern Highlands bioregions, commonly occurring on flat, fertile soils; and (2) Yellow Box – Apple Box tall grassy woodland of the South Eastern Highlands bioregion, occurring on similar soil types as (1), but along steeper well-drained slopes. Aerial photography has been used to map vegetation communities in the ACT. A number of the characteristics required to determine if areas meet the definition of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community (see above) are not discernible using this method (e.g. ground cover composition). Therefore, Figure 1 illustrates the potential distribution of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT (21,974 ha). It incorporates woodland between 625 and 800 metres above sea level, with a canopy dominated by Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (and associated trees) and/or a groundcover dominated by native species. Field inspection is required to confirm the true distribution of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland within this range..
PART B 115 Figure 1: Potential distribution of the Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland Community.Potential distribution of the Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland Community..
116 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Table 1: Species associated with woodlands in the ACT that are listed as threatened under the EPBC Act 1999 and/or the Nature Conservation Act 2014, and their frequency of occurrence in potential Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (EEC). SPECIES STATUS SIGHTINGS IN EEC (%) Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum) Endangered 100 Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor) Vulnerable 43 Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) Vulnerable 38 White-winged Triller (Lalage sueurii) Vulnerable 36 Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) Vulnerable 35 Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis) Endangered 32 Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) Endangered 31 Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor) Endangered 27 Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus) Vulnerable 26 Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta) Vulnerable 25 Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) Vulnerable 23 Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata) Vulnerable 23 Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang) Vulnerable 23 Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) Endangered 21 Glossy Black-Cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) Vulnerable 16 Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) Endangered 13 Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) Vulnerable 12 Austral Toadflax (Thesium australe) Vulnerable 11 PREVIOUS AND CURRENT MANAGEMENT PROTECT NATURE RESERVES A core focus of previous management has been to ensure Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is protected in an adequate, representative, and comprehensive reserve network. The ACT contains some of the largest (> 100 ha) and best connected remnants of good quality box-gum grassy woodland in Australia (ACT Government 2004). The establishment of leasehold title and associated planning policies in the ACT discouraged the adoption of intense pasture improvement techniques that have contributed to YB-BRG Woodland degradation more broadly. Since the implementation of the ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004), 1,156 hectares of lowland woodland have been formally protected. This includes woodland areas added to the reserve network and/or rezoned to Hills, Ridges or Buffers under the Territory Plan 2008 (Table 2). Objectives outlined in the Territory Plan 2008 for Hills, Ridges and Buffers seek to conserve environmental integrity, natural heritage resources, natural habitats, and wildlife corridors. The total area of lowland woodland managed for conservation in the ACT is 5,371 hectares. ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSETS Under the Environmental Protection Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act 1999, the ACT Government is committed to assess and offset direct impacts to Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from development. Commonwealth approval is required for any action that may significantly impact Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, or threatened species associated with YB-BRG Woodland. Environmental offset requirements for endangered ecological communities in the ACT are outlined in the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy 2015. Offset areas.
PART B 117 are managed for conservation, often for a net gain in biodiversity outcomes. Avoidance, mitigation, and offset measures detailed in offset packages approved by the Commonwealth Government meet requirements for the protection of Matters of National Environmental Significance (2013) under the EPBC Act 1999. Prior to 2012, assessment of ecological values impacted by development were largely undertaken on a site-by- site basis. However, since 2012, the ACT Government also undertakes strategic assessments to examine the ecological values of future development areas, and considers the cumulative environmental impacts of ongoing development in the areas. Strategic assessment areas where Endangered YB-BRG Woodland has been identified include Gungahlin, Molonglo Valley, West Belconnen, and Eastern Broadacre (ACT Environmental Offsets Register). Strategic assessments result in environmental protection across landscapes and contribute to sustainable development. The EPBC Offsets Policy 2012 and ACT Environmental Offsets Policy 2015 has resulted in reduced clearing and increased protection for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland due to offset requirements (Table 2). Many environmental offset sites are added to the ACT reserve network. Table 2: Patches of Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland that have received protection status in the ACT since implementation of the ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. LOCATION MANAGEMENT Mount Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve Kenny Environmental Offset Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment Environmental Offset Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Kinlyside Environmental Offset Throsby Environmental Offset Horsepark North Environmental Offset Jacka Environmental Offset Taylor Environmental Offset Kenny broadacre Environmental Offset Isaacs Ridge Environmental Offset The Pinnacle Environmental Offset Justice Robert Hope Park Environmental Offset Bonner Environmental Offset Williamsdale Environmental Offset MAINTAIN Maintaining the extent and condition of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland requires active monitoring and management of threatening processes. The ACT Government conducts monitoring of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland communities to track ecological condition and better understand threats and management outcomes. Monitoring occurs at 104 sites located in box-gum woodland across the ACT, of which 75 sites are located in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. Woodland monitoring focuses on trends in vegetation structure and floristic diversity to determine whether management actions are maintaining or enhancing ecological values. Management practices that aim to maintain woodland condition have focused on reducing intense grazing pressure, controlling invasive species, and maintaining habitat for threatened species. GRAZING PRESSURE The ACT Government invests significant resources into monitoring and managing the impacts of grazing (predominantly by Eastern Grey Kangaroo [Macropus giganteus] and European Rabbit [Oryctolagus cuniculus]) grazing on vegetation and wildlife in YB-BRG Woodland. Ecological field data on kangaroo densities, pasture growth, floristic diversity, and other habitat features are used to build predictive models of appropriate.
118 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY site-level kangaroo densities to maintain ecological values. Complementary research on faunal responses to kangaroo grazing indicates that a mosaic of grass structures is necessary to maintain native fauna diversity across landscapes (Howland et al. 2014, 2016). Kangaroo grazing pressure in YB-BRG Woodland is managed according to this aim; specific actions and policies are outlined in the ACT Kangaroo Management Plan 2010. Rabbit control measures can include harbour removal, warren ripping, fumigation and poison baits. Rabbit control is particularly important in areas targeted for revegetation with direct seeding and tube stock planting. INVASIVE SPECIES Invasive species management in the ACT is guided by the ACT Weeds Strategy 2009-2019 and the ACT Pest Animal Strategy 2012-2022. An important focus of management is the establishment of priorities for invasive species control to assist in the allocation of limited resources. In YB-BRG Woodland, priorities for managing invasive plants include controlling, and preventing the further spread of, highly invasive species such as Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana), Serrated Tussock (Nassella trichotoma), African Lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula), and St John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum). The ACT Government and ParkCare also undertake removal of woody weeds, including Cootamundra Wattle (Acacia baileyana), Blackberry (Rubus fruticosus aggregate), and Sweet Briar (Rosa rubiginosa). There has been an overall reduction of weeds in ACT woodland areas, due to targeted efforts within Canberra Nature Park. For example, in 2015-2016, targeted control resulted in a total of 3,600 ha of invasive plants being treated (predominantly African Lovegrass, Serrated Tussock, and St John’s Wort), and early invader work resulted in outbreaks of Fireweed (Senecio madagascariensis) and Mexican Feather Grass (Nassella tenuissima) being contained at urban locations adjacent to grassy woodland. Invasive animals prioritised for control in YB-BRG Woodland include European Red Foxes (Vulpes vulpes), and Feral Cats (Felis catus), which are major predators of wildlife occurring in this community. Some research and control measures are implemented by the ACT Government and community groups (e.g. Canberra Indian Myna Action Group) to better understand and limit the impact of exotic species that compete with native fauna for nesting hollows and roost sites, such as the Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis) (Grarock et al. 2012) and European Honey Bee (Apis mellifera). THREATENED SPECIES HABITAT Woodland-dependent threatened species and vulnerable fauna communities are monitored across a range of YB-BRG Woodland patches. For example, long-term monitoring programs for woodland birds, implemented by the Australian National University and Canberra Ornithologists Group, are active on Canberra Nature Parks and private land to determine the conservation status (including trends in abundance and distribution) of vulnerable avifauna. The ACT Government has also supported extensive ecological research into the habitat requirements of YB-BRG Woodland flora (Johnson et al. 2018) and fauna (e.g. Howland et al. 2014; Ikin et al. 2014; Le Roux et al. 2016), including threatened species (e.g. Rayner et al. 2016), to identify critical habitat resources. Details for monitoring actions undertaken for woodland- dependent threatened species are provided in the respective action plans. CLIMATE CHANGE The ACT Government has conducted an assessment of biodiversity refugia in the ACT region (MacKenzie et al. 2018) to identify locations where regional native plant species are likely to persist under future climate change. Species distribution models are based on climate scenarios proposed by the NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling (NARCliM) project. Results of the study provide guidance to practitioners on where to protect and manage YB-BRG Woodland and component species for their long-term persistence within the ACT..
PART B 119 IMPROVE Evidence-based ecological restoration has been a strong focus of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland management. Improvements to the extent, condition, and connectivity of YB-BRG Woodland have been delivered through The ACT Woodland Restoration Project and Biodiversity Fund Project, and Environmental Offset restoration operations (ongoing). These projects aim to improve woodland condition and connectivity using a whole-of-landscape approach. To contribute to the adaptive management of YB-BRG Woodland, the ACT Government has supported research on woodland restoration (e.g. Manning et al. 2011, Johnson et al. 2018), connectivity (e.g. Drielsma et al. 2007), and threat assessment (e.g. Cowood et al. 2018). In the ACT, restoration of YB-BRG Woodland has focussed primarily on revegetation, understorey rehabilitation, and structural enhancement. REVEGETATION Revegetation works in the ACT have been undertaken to address multiple YB-BRG Woodland conservation aims, including: increasing extent of the community, reversing tree loss, maintaining appropriate stand densities, enhancing landscape connectivity, promoting threatened species habitat, retaining genetic integrity, controlling soil erosion, and restoring plant diversity. Extensive revegetation has occurred over the past 5 years in Greater Goorooyaroo (in the ACT and NSW), Lower Cotter Catchment, the Murrumbidgee River Corridor, Pinnacle Nature Reserve, Justice Robert Hope Park and Mulligan’s Flat Nature Reserve. Future priority landscapes are in rural areas. UNDERSTOREY REHABILITATION Understorey plants play a critical role in maintaining and enhancing the ecological function of woodlands. The ACT Government has supported research trials of methods to restore the native herbaceous ground layer where plant diversity is highest (Zerger et al. 2011). The ACT Government also undertakes management activities such as weed removal, slashing (to reduce biomass of exotic dominants and reduce standing nitrogen), fire management, ecological scrapes (to remove nutrient-rich topsoil before reseeding), and direct seeding of native grasses and forbs. Research from Kama Nature Reserve has shown that native forb enhancement via direct seeding is a viable technique, provided that sufficient quantities of seed are used, excess litter is removed, soil fertility is low, and competition is reduced (Johnson et al. 2018). STRUCTURAL ENHANCEMENT Vast areas of woodland have been degraded through human activities such as tree removal and firewood collection. Such activities simplify community structure and can compromise ecological function. Logs and tree hollows are two key elements of ecosystem structure that are critical to the maintenance of biodiversity (Barton et al. 2011; Manning et al. 2013; Gibbons and Lindenmayer 2002). Research from the Mulligans Flat-Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment has been instrumental in guiding the scale and placement of coarse woody debris for the enhancement of YB-BRG Woodland. Over 4,000 tonnes of coarse woody debris have been added to ACT woodland areas, primarily to improve reptile and invertebrate habitat. Similarly, to address the loss of habitat values associated with mature trees (including carved hollows and artificial bark), the addition of vertical structures enriched with fauna habitat is being trialled in the Molonglo Valley. Monitoring is underway to evaluate their effectiveness. COLLABORATE The ACT community plays a significant role in the protection and restoration of YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT. For over 30 years, community members have made significant contributions to woodland threat management (e.g. weed removal and grazing control), restoration actions (e.g. revegetation and erosion treatment), and biodiversity monitoring (e.g. Vegwatch and woodland birds). In particular, community groups such as Greening Australia, ParkCare, Friends of Grasslands, Canberra Ornithologists Group, and the Molonglo, Ginninderra and Southern ACT Catchment Groups, considerably extend the capacity for woodland management through public outreach and the coordination of volunteer effort. The ACT community also make major contributions towards woodland conservation through advocacy, education and communication. For example, the Conservation Council has established Bush on the Boundary groups that bring together government and non-government stakeholders with an interest in conserving the integrity of ecosystems located on the urban fringe. Important educational advances have also resulted from the establishment of the Southern Tablelands Ecosystems Park within the National Arboretum, and the Canberra Nature Map website, where.
120 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY the public can share knowledge of native flora and fauna occurring within YB-BRG Woodland. Positive outcomes for the protection and restoration of YB-BRG Woodland have and will continue to come from collaborative land management partnerships with traditional owners. For example, the Caring for Ngunnawal Pathways project, developed by the Molonglo Catchment Group (in partnership with Buru Ngunnawal Aboriginal Corporation, Thunderstone Aboriginal Cultural and Land Management Services, Friends of Grasslands, Save Stirling Park, Yarralumla Residents Association, and the ACT Government) facilitates Ngunnawal leadership in the environmental restoration of a culturally and ecologically important site at Yarralumla called Bullan Mura. Over 40% of ACT lowland woodland communities occur on rural land, making respectful and innovative collaboration with private landholders pivotal to achieving regional conservation goals. Rural landholders have collaborated with the ACT Government to implement a range of projects on their properties, including those that aim to achieve sustainable agriculture and woodland conservation outcomes. For example, in collaboration with 18 rural landholders and a number of community and volunteer groups, the Woodland Restoration and Biodiversity Fund Project enhanced woodland connectivity and condition across all land tenures. THREATS Nationally, the primary threats to temperate woodland ecosystems include clearing, grazing, weed invasion, salinity, nutrient enrichment, deteriorating soil condition, altered fire regimes, and the effects of fragmentation and climate change. In the ACT, the key threats to YB-BRG Woodland are urbanisation, inappropriate disturbance regimes, invasive plants, pest animals, eucalypt dieback, and climate change. URBANISATION In south-eastern Australia, grassy woodland ecosystems have been extensively and disproportionately cleared for agriculture and urban development, and what remains is highly modified and fragmented. In the ACT, ongoing loss and fragmentation of woodland vegetation is driven primarily by urbanisation. Most of the remaining Endangered YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT occurs in the northern half of the Territory (Figure 1) where low-lying, open country, close to existing human infrastructure, is favoured for ongoing urban development and expansion. While significant ecological value may be retained by small woodland patches (Fischer and Lindenmayer 2002; Eldridge and Wong 2005) and scattered or isolated remnant trees (Manning et al. 2006; Fischer et al. 2010; Le Roux et al. 2018), fragmentation may reduce structural connectivity and habitat condition that facilitates foraging and dispersal movements by species, and population gene flow (Doerr et al. 2014). In turn, this compromises the population viability of plants and animals (e.g. Amos et al. 2014). In addition, overall habitat loss may limit species persistence such that efforts to improve landscape connectivity for particular species or taxa could be ineffective (Mortelliti et al. 2010). The predicted impacts of climate change will further exacerbate the impacts of fragmentation on species because small and isolated populations will be less able to adapt to change, or to track critical habitat resources and locally favourable bioclimatic conditions (Doerr et al. 2014). Urbanisation also has the potential to degrade YB- BRG Woodland, and the effects of disturbance may be greatest proximal to urban areas. Urbanisation can reduce the condition of YB-BRG Woodland and disrupt ecological function through direct human disturbance (e.g. high visitation, track creation), habitat modification (e.g. firewood and rock removal), poaching (i.e. illegal plant and animal collection), nutrient enrichment (e.g. urban run-off), pollution (e.g. noise, light), biotic homogenisation (i.e. the loss of habitat specialists), altered fauna communities (including predator and competitor abundances), altered hydrology, and increased pest invasion (plants and animals) (Alberti 2005). Management of urban-related threats to YB-BRG Woodland condition and biodiversity require sensitive and strategic management, particularly in woodland remnants located on the urban fringe (Ikin et al. 2015)..
PART B 121 INAPPROPRIATE DISTURBANCE REGIMES OVERGRAZING Inappropriate grazing regimes – characterised by the frequency, timing, and intensity of grazing – can cause significant disruption to plant communities, fauna habitat, and ecosystem processes in grassy woodland communities (Eldridge et al. 2016). Regardless of the dominant herbivore (native species or livestock), heavy grazing regimes negatively impact groundlayer structure (e.g. litter removal and tussock loss; McIntyre et al. 2015), native plant richness (Dorrough et al. 2012), fauna and their habitat (Lindenmayer et al. 2018; Lindsay and Cunningham 2009), regeneration and recruitment potential (Sato et al. 2016), and soil condition (Close et al. 2008). Inappropriate grazing regimes can also exacerbate other woodland threats. For example, groundlayer disturbance and soil nutrient enrichment associated with livestock grazing can facilitate weed invasion and reduce overstorey tree health (Close et al. 2008; Pettit et al. 1995). Where grazing pressure is moderated, woodland condition can improve. Improvements include more abundant, diverse and healthy native plant flora, and improved ecosystem function through, for example, increased rates of litter decomposition (Lindsay and Cunningham 2009). However, the impacts of inappropriate grazing regimes and the outcomes of grazing control, are dependent on climate and other site-level factors (e.g. fertilisation history, exotic plant competition and microsite conditions). These factors must be considered and managed (where possible) to achieve positive conservation outcomes for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland (Dorrough et al. 2011, Driscoll 2017; Prober et al. 2011; Sato et al. in review; Yates et al. 2000). FIRE Fire regimes are characterised by the frequency, intensity and season of burning. Inappropriate fire regimes can cause significant disruption to plant communities, fauna habitat, and ecosystem processes in grassy woodland communities (Driscoll et al. 2010). The most immediate and visible threat to Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from inappropriate fire regimes occurs in the understorey. Excessively frequent fires simplify woodland ecosystems by reducing the density and viability of native plant communities, and destroying groundlayer habitat elements (e.g. fallen timber, leaf litter). If fire is too infrequent, the woodland understorey can become structurally dense (Close et al. 2011; Wilson et al. 2018) and floristically homogenous (Penman et al. 2011). In turn, this alters groundlayer microclimates and limits regeneration niches (Bailey et al. 2012). Severe fires can kill native vegetation, including overstorey trees. The loss of young trees and seedlings can stunt recruitment and bias the age structure of stands. The loss of mature trees can reduce the carbon- storage and water-production potential of the ecosystem (Keith et al. 2017), increase midstorey regeneration and fire fuel loads (Wilson et al. 2018), and decrease habitat availability and diversity (e.g. destroying tree hollows; Stojanovic et al. 2016). Further, inappropriate fire regimes may impact woodland condition indirectly through altered water- and nutrient-relations. For example, Close et al. (2011) suggest that water-use efficiency, foliar nutrients, and crown health of woodland eucalypts is influenced by fire-governed understorey conditions. Weather patterns, especially precipitation, will also influence the impacts of fire frequency and severity on woodland vegetation (Hill and French 2004). INVASIVE PLANTS Invasive plants that threaten the condition of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland include exotic grasses (e.g. Chilean Needlegrass, Serrated Tussock and African Lovegrass), exotic forbs (e.g. St John’s Wort and Paterson’s Curse [Echium plantagineum]), exotic shrubs (e.g. Blackberry), and native invasive scrub (‘woody weeds’, e.g. Cootamundra Wattle). Invasion is driven by resource availability and is commonly associated with disturbance. If invasive plants are left untreated, native plant communities can be transformed into exotic pastures that further fragment the ecological community. In turn, this can lead to significant biodiversity loss, particularly in the herbaceous ground layer where plant diversity is greatest (Zerger et al. 2011). Effective restoration of YB-BRG Woodland that achieves a species-rich native understorey is impeded by limited scientific understanding of the mechanisms that bolster a plant community’s resistance to weed encroachment (Prober and Wiehl 2011). Competitive exclusion by exotic species and by native swards can inhibit efforts to restore diverse native plant communities (Lindsay and Cunningham 2011). Hence, management of herbivore grazing and soil nutrient loads, and consideration of the disturbance history of a given site, is critical to providing native plant communities with a competitive advantage over exotic invaders (Prober and Wiehl 2011; Driscoll 2017)..
122 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY PEST ANIMALS Pest animals that occur in YB-BRG Woodland include over-abundant and introduced herbivores (e.g. Eastern Grey Kangaroo and European Rabbit), introduced predators (e.g. European Red Fox, Feral Cat), introduced habitat competitors (e.g. Common Myna, Common Starling [Sturnus vulgaris]) and native habitat competitors (e.g. Noisy Miner [Manorina melanocephala] and Rainbow Lorikeet [Trichoglossus moluccanus]). The impacts of pest animals on woodland communities have been widely documented, with the management of habitat structure a re-occurring theme in abatement (e.g. Allcock and Hik 2004; Stokes et al. 2004; Pickett et al. 2005; Maron 2007). Currently, there is limited understanding of the relationship between pest animal densities and their impacts on YB-BRG Woodland to inform targeted management action. DIEBACK Dieback of native eucalypts is widespread across south- eastern Australia; woodlands across the Tablelands of NSW and the ACT are severely affected (ACT Government 1999). Trees suffering from dieback typically have smaller, sparse crowns with a high proportion of dead branches and epicormic foliage (Lynch et al. 2017). This episodic, and typically dramatic, decline in crown health can lead to extensive tree mortality in woodland communities (e.g. Ross and Brack 2015). Dieback is generally attributed to over-abundant insect populations (e.g. psyllids [Glycaspis spp.]) and exotic plant pathogens (e.g. Phytophthora cinnamom) (Jurskis 2005; O’Gara et al. 2005). However, the cause and primary stressors of dieback are poorly understood and include multiple, interacting factors such as drought, human-related disturbance, altered fire regimes, loss of understorey vegetation, water-logged or nutrient- enriched soils, and depauperate insectivore/predator communities (Jurskis 2005; Wardell-Johnson and Lynch 2005; NSW TSSC 2008, ACT Legislative Assembly 2017). Dieback effects are particularly relevant to Endangered YB-BRG Woodland because Blakely’s Red Gum trees are disproportionately affected in the ACT region. Recent modelling indicates that the change in condition of Blakely’s Red Gum and YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT between 2004 and 2017 was influenced by a range of habitat (e.g. soil characteristics and water table height), climate (e.g. seasonal precipitation) and cohort (e.g. tree canopy density) variables (Cowood et al. 2018). The impacts of dieback will be exacerbated by more extreme weather events associated with climate change (Ross and Brack 2015). CLIMATE CHANGE Climate change has become a significant emerging challenge in the conservation and management of natural ecosystems and biodiversity (Williams et al. 2014). Predicted impacts of climate change in the ACT region include (but are not limited to) increased maximum temperatures, prolonged drought, reduced soil moisture, increased intensity of heavy rainfall events, and harsher fire-weather climate (Timbal et al. 2015). As a consequence, climate change is likely to alter the structure and floristic composition of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland and compromise the resilience of grassy woodland communities. Fragmented systems are the most susceptible to condition decline (Brouwers et al. 2013), and degraded systems are likely to be the least equipped to adapt (Prober et al. 2012a). Furthermore, it is likely that climate change effects will interact with, and potentially exacerbate, other threatening processes, such as fire and dieback. Actions to enhance the long-term ecological integrity of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland must involve protection of climate refugia, as well as the management and restoration of extant YB-BRG Woodland remnants to safeguard and prepare future potential colonisation sites. Ameliorating climate change driven biodiversity loss in YB-BRG Woodland is likely to require innovative solutions that may challenge traditional approaches to conservation management (e.g. assisted colonisation; McIntyre 2011), but are critical to achieving adaptive ecological management in what may soon be novel environments..
PART B 123 CONSERVATION ISSUES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS PROTECT Patches of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland occurring in the ACT require formal protection to increase the extent, and improve the condition of the community. More degraded remnants of YB-BRG Woodland require formal protection if they support threatened species, or if they contribute to buffering, connecting or extending patches of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. Environmental assessments and other statutory processes are used to determine which areas are assigned formal protection. Unintended impacts (those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process) can reduce the extent, condition and function of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community. Therefore, a key objective is to protect all Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from unintended impacts, as well as those areas of YB-BRG Woodland that either contribute to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community or contain rare and / or threatened species. Mapping the condition of large patches of YB- BRG Woodland and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community (due either to their position in the landscape [e.g. elevation, ecological buffers], regional context [e.g. connectivity], ecological values [e.g. function and species diversity] or restoration potential [e.g. contributing to ecosystem recovery aims]), will assist in future reserve design and the prioritisation of woodland- based conservation action. MAINTAIN Conservation of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland requires the maintenance of ecological and evolutionary processes, and the persistence of biodiversity within the community. It has been suggested that the single most effective management action to protect woodland integrity is to moderate grazing pressure; in particular, to avoid overgrazing (e.g. Weinberg et al. 2011). Fire, applied at low intensity and within ecologically tolerable frequencies, will also contribute to meeting our conservation objectives in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. The primary management action, to implement appropriate grazing and fire management regimes, demands: → →regular engagement with Australian temperate grassy woodland grazing and fire research → →strategic operations planning coordinated across management teams (including kangaroo population management, livestock conservation grazing, fuel reduction and ecological burning) at local (patches and paddocks), landscape (reserves and farms) and regional (Territory wide) scales → →robust monitoring and evaluation of management actions to determine the outcomes of intervention against stated conservation goals, and to adaptively plan for successive management seasons → →collaboration with non-government stakeholders, in particular Traditional Custodians and rural landholders. Additionally, as the ACT climate changes, the application of grazing and fire in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland must continue to be informed by an evaluation of management interventions and ecological responses to support ongoing conservation decision-making (e.g. Driscoll et al. 2010; Werner 2012; Gibbons et al. 2018). Another core management objective in this action plan is to maintain understorey structural and floristic diversity in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. The greatest loss of biodiversity in woodland communities occurs through the degradation of understorey elements (Zerger et al. 2011). The ACT Government will take action to emphasise the importance of ground layer ecological management in conservation planning, and improve the effectiveness of understorey management operations..
124 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY The Woodland Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Plan (CEMP) will provide guidance on the development of target values for understorey condition as well as recommendations for appropriate management, and assist in determining if these understorey condition targets are being met and maintained. Actions outlined above will support the maintenance of threatened species habitat. However, to best serve the population recovery objectives of multiple threatened species, consideration must be given to specific resource requirements of threatened species. At some sites, it may be prudent to advance the persistence of one (or multiple) threatened species to the detriment of another; in such cases, management decisions should be made with consideration for the rarity, habitat specialisation, functional traits, mobility and adaptability of impacted species, as well as their local, regional, and national conservation status. Large, mature trees are keystone structures in woodland communities. They encourage movement of fauna, which facilitates pollination and seed dispersal (Doerr et al. 2014). They also provide a critical source of seed for recruitment (Vesk et al. 2008), provide abundant breeding, roosting and foraging habitat (Ikin et al. 2013; Le Roux et al. 2018), and enhance critical ecosystem functions (e.g. carbon-storage, water-production; Keith et al. 2017). The Loss of mature native trees (including hollow bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment is listed as a key threatening process under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Thus, a critical action for maintaining keystone structures in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is to retain mature trees and their habitat features, even where they may be isolated or occur on poorer quality woodland sites, and promote appropriate levels of overstorey development. IMPROVE RESTORATION High density regeneration or plantings can significantly reduce the growth rate and maturity of woodland trees, delaying the creation of large boughs, tree hollows and fallen timber by decades (Vesk et al. 2008; Killey et al. 2010). Thus, creating optimal stand densities and maintaining diverse age structure in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland overstorey vegetation is critical to sustaining woodland biodiversity and may require a combination of planting and thinning operations, as well as efforts to enhance germination and recruitment. Increased resilience of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community can also be achieved through strategic restoration projects that enhance ecosystem function. The ACT Government will develop spatially and temporally explicit revegetation goals to inform the management of offset areas and other restoration projects implemented by the ACT Government (e.g. the Protecting and Connecting Box-Gum Woodland project). The location and timing of revegetation in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, and the purpose of restoration will be considered in the development of project specific revegetation guidelines (e.g. increasing habitat, improving connectivity, and / or restoring soil condition). Consideration will also be given to: (i) landscape context and landuse history of the location, including connectivity (ii) functional traits of planted species, (iii) timeline of successional plantings, and (iv) location of predicted climate refugia (MacKenzie et al. 2018). The ACT Government will aim to support revegetation works across mixed land tenures (Manning et al. 2010), particularly those that may enhance Endangered YB- BRG Woodland climate resilience (Prober et al. 2012b; Hancock et al. 2018). The capacity of natural regeneration to meet restoration objectives that would otherwise be addressed with revegetation should be explored concurrently. Natural regeneration is often cheaper than planting, and typically establishes healthy plants, well- adapted to site-specific conditions (Spooner et. al. 2002; Rawlings et al. 2010). RESEARCH There remain significant knowledge gaps about how best to manage grazing in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland; particularly, how to balance grazing pressure from native herbivores with controlled conservation grazing by livestock. Effective guidelines for achieving ecologically sensitive and adaptive grazing regimes that incorporate both native and introduced herbivores, would be advanced by a robust evaluation of the conservation outcomes of controlled grazing by different herbivore species. Evaluating the differences between native and ungulate grazing management outcomes will include ecological (e.g. soil compaction, nutrient enrichment), social (e.g. animal welfare, lethal control), and economic (e.g. fencing and infrastructure) considerations. Further, this evaluation would be supported by long-term monitoring to assess the spatial (e.g. herbivore-related distribution of grazing pressure) and temporal (e.g. natural versus controlled timing of grazing) outcome of experimental grazing regimes..
PART B 125 There is limited knowledge regarding the causes and stressors of dieback in YB-BRG Woodland. This lack of ecological and technical knowledge is recognised as a barrier to effective policy development to mitigate the impacts of dieback (O’Gara et al. 2005). The ACT Government has identified a number of issues that warrant future research, these include studying the interactions between dieback and; fire frequency, landuse, vegetation density, soil moisture and condition, insects and fungal pathogens. The ACT Government has embarked on provenance trials of seeds from Blakely’s Red Gum trees that appear to be more resilient to dieback in this region, and those that occur in warmer drier regions that represent the possible future climate of the ACT. However, there are many research questions that need to be addressed to inform the protection of remaining Endangered YB-BRG Woodland remnants from the effects of dieback. Therefore, this action plan seeks to ensure monitoring of dieback is undertaken and support is provided to projects that improve our understanding of the causes of dieback. The ACT Government will undertake monitoring and support research projects that improve our understanding of the impacts of climate change on the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. This includes spatial and ecological modelling of: (i) climate refugia of the community and component species; (ii) future potential colonisation sites; (iii) understorey responses to predicted climate impacts; and (iv) changes to woodland soil condition with drying conditions. Research and monitoring findings will inform the development of climate resilient revegetation principles, and guide future restoration field trials. Important progress is already underway through collaborative projects involving, for example, the Australian Government and CSIRO (Prober et al. 2014a, 2014b, 2015). The ACT Government will undertake monitoring and research to improve our understanding of how to successfully restore understorey elements of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. There is also a need to better understand how invasive plants impact efforts to maintain and improve Endangered YB-BRG Woodland condition, and the effectiveness of invasive plant control. This information will improve projects that aim to enhance YB-BRG Woodland condition and will inform the development of revegetation goals (see above). COLLABORATE Ongoing collaboration between the ACT Government and non-government groups (including community groups, conservation organisations, rural land holders, Traditional Custodians and research institutions) is critical to achieving effective conservation of YB-BRG Woodland. The ACT Government will continue to facilitate community participation in YB-BRG Woodland conservation. It will also continue to refine and develop new ways of collaborating with the community to ensure that YB-BRG Woodland remains a viable ecological community for future generations. This will be undertaken through, for example, providing volunteering opportunities through the Landcare Gateway and ACT Government’s ParkCare Hub. ParkCare programs such as Ranger Assist provide opportunities for the public to work directly with Park Rangers in land management roles and involves undertaking activities such as survey data collection, fencing, and digital mapping. Providing support to citizen science programs (such as Canberra Nature Map and other programs delivered by non- government agencies) is another excellent way the ACT Government can enhance community knowledge and participation in conservation. In collaboration with Greening Australia, Molonglo Catchment Group and rural landholders, the Act Government is implementing the Protecting and Connecting Box-Gum Woodland project. This project aims to enhance and connect Endangered YB- BRG Woodland, including improving conservation outcomes for woodland biodiversity on rural properties. Rural landholders will also collaborate with the ACT Government and CSIRO to host research into the genetic variation of traits that may give Blakely’s Red Gum resistance to dieback. The ACT Government is committed to working with Traditional Custodians to undertake management in YB-BRG woodlands. The Murumbung Rangers in the ACT Parks and Conservation Service and the Aboriginal ACT Natural Resource Management Facilitator will provide a key role in raising awareness, appreciation and application of traditional land management. Cultural burns, which employ both traditional and contemporary knowledge are often referred to as ‘cool burns’ and may be adopted to facilitate cultural renewal, safeguard culturally significant sits and reduce fuel load and risk of high intensity burns in woodlands..
126 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY As conservation opportunities and challenges evolve, the need to learn through collaborative research and adaptive management remains critical. Further, new knowledge must be disseminated to the ACT community so that shared protection and restoration priorities can be developed and implemented. The ACT Government will facilitate open and timely communication of YB-BRG Woodland research findings with the ACT community. This will involve sharing research findings, as well as undertaking targeted communications to community stakeholders with an interest in woodland conservation. Feedback from the community on research advances will be considered and, where possible, incorporated into future conservation planning for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS AND INDICATORS Table 1: Key objectives, actions and indicators to support the conservation of Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Protect remaining areas of YB- BRG Woodland from unintended impacts (unintended impacts are those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process) 1a.  Protect all Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from unintended impacts All Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are protected from unintended impacts 1b.  Protect YB-BRG Woodlands that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB- BRG Woodland community and/or contain rare or threatened species from unintended impacts YB-BRG Woodland that contributes significantly to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community are protected from unintended impacts YB-BRG Woodland areas that support rare or threatened species are protected from unintended impacts 1c.  Map the condition of large patches of YB-BRG Woodland and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community Develop and make publicly available maps of large patches of YB-BRG Woodlands and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community MAINTAIN 2  Maintain the ecological values of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland to promote ecosystem function and prevent biodiversity loss, including maintaining: → →understorey structural and floristic diversity → →optimal habitat for threatened species, including keystone structures 2a.  Implement appropriate grazing and fire management regimes 2b.  Develop and implement the Woodland Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program Monitoring indicates understorey condition targets are consistently being met Monitoring indicates that habitat for threatened species is maintained within range of acceptable variability.
PART B 127 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR 2c.  Retain mature trees by protecting them fire, urban and infrastructure development and applying lease conditions Where appropriate, healthy mature trees, and standing dead trees are retained in YB-BRG Woodland 2d.  Promote appropriate levels of overstorey development in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland Regeneration of overstorey species is occurring IMPROVE 3.  Improve the condition and ecological function of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland by undertaking restoration 3a.  Create optimal stand densities, and maintain diverse age structure in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland overstorey vegetation Endangered YB-BRG Woodland remnants are open (4-30% foliage cover), with a distribution of tree ages and sizes 3b.  Develop spatially and temporally explicit revegetation goals (for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland) for restoration projects 3c.  Undertake restoration projects in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland Restoration projects for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are implemented and informed by spatially and temporally explicit restoration goals Monitoring indicates restoration goals for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are achieved 4.  Improve understanding of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland ecology, restoration principles and best practice threat management 4a.  Evaluate the conservation outcomes of controlled grazing by different herbivore species in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland 4b.  Continue to adapt guidelines for controlled grazing regimes in Endangered YB BRG Woodland Monitoring indicates conservation values are improving in Endangered YB BRG Woodland 4c.  Monitor dieback in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland and support research projects that improve our understanding of the causes of dieback Knowledge of dieback in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is enhanced and informs woodland restoration projects 4d.  Undertake monitoring and support research projects that improve our understanding of the impacts of climate change on the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community Monitoring and research on the impacts of climate change inform woodland restoration projects 4e.  Undertake monitoring and support research projects that improve our understanding of how to successfully restore Endangered YB-BRG understorey Monitoring and research on understorey restoration techniques inform woodland restoration projects.
128 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR 4f.  Undertake monitoring and support research projects to improve our understanding of: → →the impact of invasive plants on the condition of Endangered YB-BRG → →the effectiveness of invasive plant control in maintaining / improving biodiversity values. Monitoring and research on invasive plants and their control informs the ongoing management woodlands and restoration projects COLLABORATE 5.  Strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland 5a. Work with Traditional Custodians to undertake management in YB- BRG woodlands Traditional Custodians have participated in activities to manage the conservation and cultural values of YB-BRG woodland Traditional Custodians are satisfied with their level of participation in conservation of YB-BRG Woodland 5b.  Facilitate community participation in YB-BRG Woodland conservation and raise community awareness 5c.  Continue to refine and develop new means of collaborating with the community in the conservation of Endangered YB BRG Woodland The ACT Government has implemented and/or provided support to citizen science and other community programs for the conservation of YB-BRG Woodland. The ACT Government has partnered with rural landholders to undertake research and/or management projects for the conservation of YB- BRG Woodland (including projects that consider both profitability and conservation outcomes). Community stakeholders are satisfied with their level of participation in conservation of YB-BRG Woodland 5d.  Facilitate open and timely communication of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland research findings with the ACT community Findings of woodland research are effectively communicated to the community.
PART B 129 IMPLEMENTATION Implementation of this action plan will result in new knowledge about the ecology of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. This knowledge will recurrently inform conservation advice and the delivery of management actions in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland during the life of the plan. Critical to the effective conservation management of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland will be the timely review of monitoring data that captures ecological responses to proposed management interventions. Toward this aim, the ACT Government commits to the development of the Woodland Integrated Ecosystem Implementation Plan, and the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program for Lowland Woodlands. These documents will facilitate adaptive management of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland to maximise conservation gains intended from measures proposed in this action plan. Further, implementation of this action plan will require: → →land planning and land management areas of the ACT Government to take into account the conservation of threatened species and communities → →allocation of adequate resources to undertake the actions specified in the strategy and action plans → →liaison with other jurisdictions (particularly NSW) and other landholders (Commonwealth Government) with responsibility for the conservation of the threatened community and component species → →collaboration with universities, CSIRO and other research institutions to facilitate and undertake required research → →collaboration with non-government organisations to undertake on-ground actions → →collaboration with the community, where relevant, to assist with monitoring and other on-ground actions, and to help raise community awareness of conservation issues. Under s.108 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014 the Conservator of Flora and Fauna must report to the Minister about each action plan at least once every five years and make the report publicly accessible within 30 days. The Scientific Committee must review an action plan every 10 years, or at any other time at the Conservator’s request..
130 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This action plan was prepared by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government. APPENDIX A NATURE CONSERVATION ACT (1980) CRITERIA SATISFIED 3.2  The community is subject to current and continuing threats or other processes likely to lead to premature extinction as demonstrated by: 3.2.1 Severe decline in distribution. 3.2.2 Marked alteration of composition or structure. 3.2.3 Community is approaching non-sustainability. 3.2.4 Loss or decline of species that play a major role in community function. 3.2.5 Small distribution causing the community to be at risk of premature extinction. 3.2.6  Community processes being altered to the extent that interaction between the community components will be impeded..
PART B 131 REFERENCES ACT Government. (1999). Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland: An endangered ecological community. Action Plan No. 10. Canberra. ACT Government. (2004). Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservaton Strategy Canberra. ACT Legislative Assembly. (2017). Standing committee on environment and transport and city services. Paper presented at the [Inquiry into referred 2016-17 Annual and Financial Reports: QoN No. 04], Canberra. Alberti, M. (2005). The Effects of Urban Patterns on Ecosystem Function. International Regional Science Review, 28(2), 168-192. Allcock, K., & Hik, D. (2004). Survival, growth, and escape from herbivory are determined by habitat and herbivore species for three Australian woodland plants. Oecologia, 138(2), 231-241. Amos, J. N., Harrisson, K. A., Radford, J. Q., White, M., Newell, G., Nally, R. M., Sunnucks, P., & Pavlova, A. (2014). Species- and sex-specific connectivity effects of habitat fragmentation in a suite of woodland birds. Ecology, 95(6), 1556-1568. Armstrong, R. C., Turner, K. D., McDougall, K. L., Rehwinkel, R., & Crooks, J. I. (2013). Plant communities of the upper Murrumbidgee Catchment in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. Cunninghamia, A Journal of Plant Ecology For Eastern Australia, 13(1), 125-266. Bailey, T. G., Davidson, N. J., & Close, D. C. (2012). Understanding the regeneration niche: Microsite attributes and recruitment of eucalypts in dry forests.(Report). Forest Ecology and Management, 269, 229. Barton, P. S., Manning, A. D., Gibb, H., Wood, J. T., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Cunningham, S. A. (2011). Experimental reduction of native vertebrate grazing and addition of logs benefit beetle diversity at multiple scales. Journal of Applied Ecology, 48(4), 943. Brouwers, N. C., Mercer, J., Lyons, T., Poot, P., Veneklaas, E., & Hardy, G. (2013). Climate and landscape drivers of tree decline in a Mediterranean ecoregion. Ecology and Evolution, 3(1), 67-79. Close, D. C., Davidson, N. J., & Swanborough, P. W. (2011). Fire history and understorey vegetation: water and nutrient relations of Eucalyptus gomphocephala and E. delegatensis overstorey trees. Forest Ecology and Management, 262(2), 208-214. Close, D. C., Davidson, N. J., & Watson, T. (2008). Health of remnant woodlands in fragments under distinct grazing regimes. Biological Conservation, 141(9), 2395-2402. Commonwealth Government. (2006). White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodlands and Derived Native Grasslands listing advice and conservation advice. Cowood, A. L., Lynch, A. J. J., & Botha, J. (2018). Blakely’s Red Rum dieback in the ACT: report to the ACT Enviornment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Canberra: Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra. Doerr, E. D., Doerr, V. A., Davies, M. J., & McGinness, H. M. (2014). Does structural connectivity facilitate movement of native species in Australia’s fragmented landscapes?: a systematic review protocol. Environmental Evidence, 3(1), 9. Dorrough, J., McIntyre, S., Brown, G., Stol, J., Barrett, G., & Brown, A. (2012). Differential responses of plants, reptiles and birds to grazing management, fertilizer and tree clearing. Austral Ecology, 37(5), 569-582. Dorrough, J., McIntyre, S., & Scroggie, M. P. (2011). Individual plant species responses to phosphorus and livestock grazing. Australian Journal of Botany, 59(7), 669-680. Drielsma, M., Manion, G., & Ferrier, S. (2007). The spatial links tool: Automated mapping of habitat linkages in variegated landscapes. Ecological Modelling, 200(3), 403-411. Driscoll, D. A. (2017). Disturbance maintains native and exotic plant species richness in invaded grassy woodlands. Journal of Vegetation Science, 28(3), 573-584. Driscoll, D. A., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bennett, A. F., Bode, M., Bradstock, R. A., Cary, G. J., Clarke, M. F., Dexter, N., Fensham, R., Friend, G., Gill, M., James, S., Kay, G., Keith, D. A.
, Macgregor, C., Possingham, H. P., Russel-Smith, J., Salt, D., Watson, J. E. M., Williams, D., & York, A. (2010). Resolving conflicts in fire management using decision theory: asset- protection versus biodiversity conservation. Conservation Letters, 3(4), 215-223..
132 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Eldridge, D., & Wong, V. (2005). Clumped and isolated trees influence soil nutrient levels in an Australian temperate box woodland. Plant and Soil, 270(1), 331-342. Eldridge, D. J., Poore, A. G. B., Ruiz-Colmenero, M., Letnic, M., & Soliveres, S. (2016). Ecosystem structure, function, and composition in rangelands are negatively affected by livestock grazing. Ecological Applications, 26(4), 1273-1283. Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2002). Small patches can be valuable for biodiversity conservation: two case studies on birds in southeastern Australia. Biological Conservation, 106(1), 129-136. Fischer, J., Stott, J., & Law, B. S. (2010). The disproportionate value of scattered trees. Biological Conservation, 143(6), 1564-1567. Gibbons, P. (2002). Tree hollows and wildlife conservation in Australia. Melbourne: CSIRO Publishing. Gibbons, P., Gill, A. M., Shore, N., Moritz, M. A., Dovers, S., & Cary, G. J. (2018). Options for reducing house-losses during wildfires without clearing trees and shrubs. Landscape and Urban Planning, 174, 10-17. Grarock, K., Tidemann, C. R., Wood, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2012). Is it benign or is it a pariah? Empirical evidence for the impact of the Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis) on Australian Birds. PLoS ONE, 7(7). Hancock, N., Harris, R., Broadhurst, L., & Hughes, L. (2018). Climate-ready revegetation. A guide for natural resource managers. Version 2. Accessible from: http://anpc.asn.au/resources/climate_ready_revegetation: Macquarie University, Sydney. Hill, S. J., & French, K. (2004). Potential impacts of fire and grazing in an endangered ecological community: plant composition and shrub and eucalypt regeneration in Cumberland Plain Woodland. Australian Journal of Botany, 52(1), 23-29. Howland, B., Stojanovic, D., Gordon, I. J., Manning, A. D., Fletcher, D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2014). Eaten out of house and home: impacts of grazing on ground-dwelling reptiles in Australian grasslands and grassy woodlands. PLoS ONE, 9(12). Howland, B., Stojanovic, D., Gordon, I. J., Radford, J., Manning, A. D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Birds of a feather flock together: Using trait-groups to understand the effect of macropod grazing on birds in grassy habitats. Biological Conservation, 194, 89-99. Ikin, K., Barton, P., Knight, E., Lindenmayer, D., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. (2014). Bird community responses to the edge between suburbs and reserves. Oecologia, 174(2), 545-557. Ikin, K., Knight, E., Lindenmayer, D. B., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. D. (2013). The influence of native versus exotic streetscape vegetation on the spatial distribution of birds in suburbs and reserves. Diversity and Distributions, 19(3), 294-306. Ikin, K., Le Roux, D. S., Rayner, L., Villaseñor, N. R., Eyles, K., Gibbons, P., Manning, A. D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2015). Key lessons for achieving biodiversity-sensitive cities and towns. Ecological Management & Restoration, 16(3), 206-214. Johnson, D. P., Catford, J. A., Driscoll, D. A., & Gibbons, P. (2018). Seed addition and biomass removal key to restoring native forbs in degraded temperate grassland. Applied Vegetation Science, 21(2), 219-228. Jurskis, V. (2005). Eucalypt decline in Australia, and a general concept of tree decline and dieback. Forest Ecology and Management, 215(1), 1-20. Keith, H., Vardon, M., Stein, J. A., Stein, J. L., & Lindenmayer, D. (2017). Ecosystem accounts define explicit and spatial trade-offs for managing natural resources. Nature Conservation & Ecology, 1(11), 1683. Killey, P., McElhinny, C., Rayner, I., & Wood, J. (2010). Modelling fallen branch volumes in a temperate eucalypt woodland: implications for large senescent trees and benchmark loads of coarse woody debris.
 Austral Ecology, 35(8), 956-968. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bistricer, G., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2016). Effects of entrance size, tree size and landscape context on nest box occupancy: Considerations for management and biodiversity offsets. Forest Ecology and Management, 366, 135-142. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2018). The value of scattered trees for wildlife: Contrasting effects of landscape context and tree size. Diversity and Distributions, 24(1), 69-81..
PART B 133 Lindenmayer, D. B., Blanchard, W., Crane, M., Michael, D., & Sato, C. (2018). Biodiversity benefits of vegetation restoration are undermined by livestock grazing. Restoration Ecology, 26(6). Lindsay, E. A., & Cunningham, S. A. (2009). Livestock grazing exclusion and microhabitat variation affect invertebrates and litter decomposition rates in woodland remnants. Forest Ecology and Management, 258(2), 178. Lindsay, E. A., & Cunningham, S. A. (2011). Native Grass Establishment in Grassy Woodlands with Nutrient Enriched Soil and Exotic Grass Invasion.(Report). Restoration Ecology, 19(101), 131. Lynch, A. J. J., Botha, J., Johnston, L., Peden, L., Seddon, J., & Corrigan, T. (2017). Managing a complex problem: Blakely’s Red Gum dieback in the ACT Paper presented at the Restore, Regenerate, Revegetate Conference, Armidale, NSW. Mackenzie, J., Baines, G., Johnston, L., & Seddon, J. (2019). Identifying biodiversity refugia under climate change in the ACT and region. Canberra: Conservation Research. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Manning, A. D., Cunningham, R. B., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2013). Bringing forward the benefits of coarse woody debris in ecosystem recovery under different levels of grazing and vegetation density. Biological Conservation, 157, 204-214. Manning, A. D., Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2006). Scattered trees are keystone structures – implications for conservation. Biological Conservation, 132(3), 311-321. Manning, A. D., Shorthouse, D. J., Stein, J. L., & Stein, J. A. (2010). Ecological connectivity for climate change in the ACT and surrounding region. Technical Report 21. Canberra: The Australian National University. Manning, A. D., Wood, J. T., Cunningham, R. B., McIntyre, S., Shorthouse, D. J., Gordon, I. J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2011). Integrating research and restoration: the establishment of a long-term woodland experiment in south-eastern Australia. Australian Zoologist, 35(3). Maron, M. (2007). Threshold effect of eucalypt density on an aggressive avian competitor. Biological Conservation, 136(1), 100-107. McIntyre, S. (2011). Ecological and anthropomorphic factors permitting low-risk assisted colonization in temperate grassy woodlands. Biological Conservation, 144(6), 1781-1789. McIntyre, S., Cunningham, R. B., Donnelly, C. F., & Manning, A. D. (2015). Restoration of eucalypt grassy woodland: effects of experimental interventions on ground-layer vegetation. Australian Journal of Botany, 62(7), 570-579. Mortelliti, A., Fagiani, S., Battisti, C., Capizzi, D., & Boitani, L. (2010). Independent effects of habitat loss, habitat fragmentation and structural connectivity on forest-dependent birds. Diversity and Distributions, 16(6), 941-951. NSW Government. (2008). Forest eucalypt dieback associated with over-abundant psyllids and Bell Miners - key threatening process listing. [NSW Scientific Committee - Final determination]. NSW. O’Gara, E., Howard, K., Wilson, B., & Hardy, G. E. S. J. (2005). Management of Phytophthora cinnamomi for Biodiversity Conservation in Australia: Part 1 – A Review of Current Management. Western Australia. Penman, T. D., Binns, D. L., Shiels, R. J., Allen, R. M., & Penman, S. H. (2011). Hidden effects of forest management practices: responses of a soil stored seed bank to logging and repeated prescribed fire. Austral Ecology, 36(5), 571- 580. Pettit, N. E., Froend, R. H., & Ladd, P. G. (1995). Grazing in remnant woodland vegetation: changes in species composition and life form groups. Journal of Vegetation Science, 6(1), 121-130. Pickett, K., Hik, D., Newsome, A., & Pech, R. (2005). The influence of predation risk on foraging behaviour of brushtail possums in Australian woodlands. Wildlife Research, 32(2), 121-130. Prober, S., Hilbert, D., Ferrier, S., Dunlop, M., & Gobbett, D. (2012a). Combining community-level spatial modelling and expert knowledge to inform climate adaptation in temperate grassy eucalypt woodlands and related grasslands. Biodiversity and Conservation, 21(7), 1627-1650. Prober, S., Stol, J.
, Piper, M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Cunningham, S. (2014a). Towards climate-resilient restoration in mesic eucalypt woodlands: characterizing topsoil biophysical condition in different degradation states. Plant and Soil, 383(1), 231-244..
134 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Prober, S., Thiele, K., Rundel, P., Yates, C., Berry, S., Byrne, M., Christidis, L., Gosper, C., Grierson, P., Lemson, K., Lyons, T., Macfarlane, C., O’Connor, M., Scott, J., Standish, R., Stock, W., Etten, E., Wardell-Johnson, G., & Watson, A. (2012b). Facilitating adaptation of biodiversity to climate change: a conceptual framework applied to the world’s largest Mediterranean-climate woodland. Climatic Change, 110(1), 227-248. Prober, S., & Wiehl, G. (2011). Resource heterogeneity and persistence of exotic annuals in long-ungrazed Mediterranean-climate woodlands. Biological Invasions, 13(9), 2009-2022. Prober, S. M., Ebyrne, M., Mclean, E., H, Steane, D., A, Potts, B., M, Vaillancourt, R., E, & Stock, W., D. (2015). Climate- adjusted provenancing: a strategy for climate-resilient ecological restoration. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 3. Prober, S. M., Standish, R. J., & Wiehl, G. (2011). After the fence: vegetation and topsoil condition in grazed, fenced and benchmark eucalypt woodlands of fragmented agricultural landscapes. Australian Journal of Botany, 59(4), 369-381. Prober, S. M., Stol, J., Piper, M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Cunningham, S. A. (2014b). Enhancing soil biophysical condition for climate-resilient restoration in mesic woodlands. Ecological Engineering, 71, 246-255. Rawlings, K., Freudenberger, D., & Carr, D. (2010). A guide to managing box gum grassy woodlands: Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and Arts. Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R., & Manning, A. (2016). Technical Report. Breeding ecology of the superb parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra. Nest Monitoring Report 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.environment. act.gov.au/cpr/conservation-research/report_series Ross, C., & Brack, C. (2015). Eucalyptus viminalis dieback in the Monaro region, NSW. Australian Forestry, 1-11. Sato, C. F., Florance, D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2019). Drivers of temperate woodland condition through time in an agricultural landscape. Land Degradation & Development, 30(11), 1357-1367. Sato, C. F., Wood, J. T., Stein, J. A., Crane, M., Okada, S., Michael, D. R., Kay, G. M., Florance, D., Seddon, J., Gibbons, P., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Natural tree regeneration in agricultural landscapes: The implications of intensification. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 230, 98-104. Spooner, P., Lunt, I., & Robinson, W. (2002). Is fencing enough? The short-term effects of stock exclusion in remnant grassy woodlands in southern NSW. Ecological Management & Restoration, 3(2), 117-126. Stojanovic, D., Webb Nee Voogdt, J., Webb, M., Cook, H., & Heinsohn, R. (2016). Loss of habitat for a secondary cavity nesting bird after wildfire. Forest Ecology and Management, 360, 235-241. Stokes, V. L., Pech, R. P., Banks, P. B., & Arthur, A. D. (2004). Foraging behaviour and habitat use by Antechinus flavipes and Sminthopsis murina (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae) in response to predation risk in eucalypt woodland. Biological Conservation, 117(3), 331-342. Timbal, B., Abbs, D., Bhend, J., Chiew, F., Church, J., Ekström, M., Kirono, D., Lenton, A., Lucas, C., McInnes, K., Moise, A., Monselesan, D., Mpelasoka, F., Webb, L., & Whetton, P. (2015). Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions: Cluster Reports, (M. Ekström, P. Whetton, C. Gerbing, M. Grose, L. Webb, & J. Risbey Eds.). Australia: CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology.
 Vesk, P. A., Nolan, R., Thomson, J. R., Dorrough, J. W., & Nally, R. M. (2008). Time lags in provision of habitat resources through revegetation. Biological Conservation, 141(1), 174-186. Wardell-Johnson, G., & Lynch, A. J. J. (2005). Landscape processes and eucalypt dieback associated with bell miner habitat in south-eastern Australia. Australian Forestry, 68(4), 242-250. Weinberg, A., Gibbons, P., Briggs, S. V., & Bonser, S. P. (2011). The extent and pattern of Eucalyptus regeneration in an agricultural landscape. Biological Conservation, 144(1), 227-233. Werner, P. A. (2012). Growth of juvenile and sapling trees differs with both fire season and understorey type: Trade-offs and transitions out of the fire trap in an Australian savanna. Austral Ecology, 37(6), 644-657. Williams, K. J., Prober, S. M., Harwood, T. D., Doerr, V. A. J., Jeanneret, T., Manion, G., & Ferrier, S. (2014). Implications of climate change for biodiversity: a community-level modelling approach. Canberra. Wilson, N., Cary, G. J., & Gibbons, P. (2018). Relationships between mature trees and fire fuel hazard in Australian forest. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 27(5), 353-362..
PART B 135 Yates, C. J., Norton, D. A., & Hobbs, R. J. (2000). Grazing effects on plant cover, soil and microclimate in fragmented woodlands in south-western Australia: implications for restoration. Austral Ecology, 25(1), 36-47. Zerger, A., McIntyre, S., Gobbett, D., & Stol, J. (2011). Remote detection of grassland nutrient status for assessing ground layer vegetation condition and restoration potential of eucalypt grassy woodlands. Landscape and Urban Planning, 102(4), 226-233..
PART B 137 CANBERRA SPIDER ORCHID CALADENIA ACTENSIS ACTION PLAN.
138 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY PREAMBLE The Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis, D. A. Jones & M. A. Clem, 1999 syn. Arachnorchis actensis) was declared an endangered species in the ACT on 11 April 2005 (Instrument No. DI2005- 39 under the Nature Conservation Act 1980). The species is currently being considered for listing as Critically Endangered under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Under section 101 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing a draft action plan for listed species. The first action plan for this species was prepared in 2010 (Frawley 2010). This action plan supersedes the earlier edition. Measures proposed in this action plan complement those proposed in the action plans for the endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and component threatened species such as the Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum), Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) and Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii). CONSERVATION STATUS The Canberra Spider Orchid is declared a threatened species in line with the following legislation: → →National: Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Critically Endangered) → →Australian Capital Territory: Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Critically Endangered) and Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Special Protection Status Species). CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES The objective of this action plan is to preserve the Canberra Spider Orchid in perpetuity in the wild across its natural geographic range in the ACT and contribute to the regional and national conservation of the species. Specific objectives of the action plan are to: → →protect sites where the species is known to occur in the ACT from unintended impacts → →manage the species and its habitat to maintain the potential for evolutionary development in the wild → →improve the long-term viability of populations through management of woodlands to increase habitat area and connect populations → →expand the range of the species in the ACT by identifying suitable habitat and establishing new populations by translocation → →improve understanding of the species’ ecology, habitat and threats → →strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of the species. SPECIES DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY DESCRIPTION The Canberra Spider Orchid is a small terrestrial orchid (40-90mm) that may grow as a single plant or in small groups. It has a densely hairy lanceolate-shaped leaf (between 4-9cm long and 0.6-0.8 cm wide) that is dull green with a purple-blotched base. The flowers of the species are solitary (rarely two) and grow to 12–20 mm in diameter. The base of the flower is greenish and is heavily marked with red- crimson lines and suffusions (Jones and Clements 1999). The Canberra Spider Orchid is a seasonal perennial; it remains as a dormant underground tuber over summer and emerges from the ground following good rains in late autumn or early winter. Flower buds appear in late winter or early spring and plants flower from late September to mid-October. Plants are sexually deceptive, imitating female insects by emitting floral volatiles to achieve pollination by a thynnine wasp, nov. gen. (actensis) sp. 1 (Hayashi 2016). To germinate, seeds of the Canberra Spider Orchid are reliant on a symbiotic association with a mycorrhizal fungus of the Serendipita genus (syn. Sebacina vermifera) (C. Linde 2018, personal communication, 31 July). The species depends on the same fungus to supply them with adequate carbon and nutrients (especially phosphorus) throughout their lives (Milburn and Rouse 2004)..
PART B 139 DISTRIBUTION The Canberra Spider Orchid is endemic to the ACT. Until recently, it was only known to occur within a small area (approximately five hectares) on the lower western slopes of Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura in Canberra Nature Park (Milburn and Rouse 2004). Additional populations of the species have been located at these sites, as well as within the Majura Valley (Department of Defence land) and Kowen Escarpment Nature Reserve. Populations of the Canberra Spider Orchid recorded on Mt Ainslie (in the suburb of Campbell) and adjacent to Old Weetangera Road (to the north of Black Mountain), are no longer present. A map of the current distribution of the species is available on the ACT Government’s mapping portal, ACTmapi. HABITAT AND ECOLOGY The Canberra Spider Orchid grows at an altitude of 645 - 745 m, most commonly on the Burra and Campbell soil landscapes. These soil landscapes consist of shallow, well drained Lithosols and Red and Yellow Earths on upper slopes, and moderately deep, moderately drained Red and Yellow Podzolic Soils on lower slopes. The species less commonly occurs on the Queanbeyan and Williamsdale soil landscapes, which comprise moderately well-drained, shallow Lithosols and moderately deep Red and Yellow Podzolic Soils (Jenkins 2000). The species occurs within a number of vegetation communities across its range; specifically Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box ± White Box tall grassy woodlands of the Upper South Western Slopes and western South Eastern Highlands Bioregions, Yellow Box ± Apple Box tall grassy woodland of the South Eastern Highlands and Red Stringybark – Scribbly Gum – Red-Anthered Wallaby Grass tall grass-shrub dry sclerophyll open forest on loamy ridges of the central South Eastern Highlands Bioregion (Armstrong and Turner et al. 2013). Small populations on Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura Nature Reserve occur in Drooping She-oak low woodland to open forest on shallow infertile hillslopes in the Australian Capital Territory and surrounds (Baines et al. 2013). The majority of populations across the species distribution occur within the endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Canberra Spider Orchid plants occur amid a groundcover of grasses, forbs and low shrubs, often among rocks. The largest populations on Mt Majura are partly shaded from the tree canopy, in otherwise open areas among rocks (Milburn and Rouse 2004). PREVIOUS AND CURRENT MANAGEMENT MT AINSLIE AND MT MAJURA Most populations of the Canberra Spider Orchid located on Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura are protected within nature reserves. Dr Peter Milburn of the Australian National University first began monitoring these populations in the 1990s. The ACT Government has conducted all monitoring of the populations since 2015. While the size of the populations at Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura fluctuate annually, there has been an overall increase in the total number of individuals at these sites. In 2002, there were approximately 100 individuals; by 2003, 250 individuals were recorded (Frawley 2010). Over 480 plants were recorded from the two populations in 2014 (ACT Government unpublished data). This increase is partially due to an increase in survey effort. Milburn (2008) highlighted that grazing and disturbance by rabbits, kangaroos and other vertebrates threaten the survival of the populations. In 2010, permanent fences were erected to protect two populations from grazing and other disturbance. Temporary cages have since been used successfully to protect small, dense patches of the species from grazing. The ACT Parks and Conservation Service also conduct extensive rabbit control across Mt Ainslie and Mt Majura. MAJURA VALLEY Populations of the Canberra Spider Orchid at Majura Valley grow on Department of Defence land, where access and land use restrictions are enforced. These controls, along with weed and grazing management, have ensured the ongoing persistence of the species within the woodland habitat in the valley. Monitoring of the population is managed by the Department of Defence..
140 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY KOWEN ESCARPMENT The recently discovered population of the Canberra Spider Orchid on the Kowen Escarpment is located within a nature reserve. No specific management actions have been undertaken to maintain or enhance the population. THREATS The Canberra Spider Orchid has a small distribution in the ACT. Urban development and agricultural practices have resulted in the loss, degradation and fragmentation of appropriate woodland habitat for the Canberra Spider Orchid. As a result, populations of the species in the ACT are small and severely fragmented, and thus likely to be genetically depauperate. Poor genetic diversity and life history strategies of the species (including short flowering period, dependence on a single sub-family of wasps for pollination and association with soil fungi) is likely to leave it vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, disturbance and disease. The most common disturbances to the habitat of the Canberra Spider Orchid include animal trampling, grazing pressure, the development and maintenance of infrastructure, and bushfire. CHANGING CLIMATE A range of indirect impacts resulting from a changing climate may threaten the persistence of the species at some sites. These include increased drought conditions, and changes in plant species composition (including invasive species) and fire frequency and intensity. A lack of connectivity and genetic diversity within populations is likely to reduce the resilience of the species to the impacts of climate change. CONSERVATION ISSUES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS PROTECTION A critical element in the conservation of the Canberra Spider Orchid is the conservation of lowland grassy woodlands including the endangered Yellow Box- Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. The majority of the extant populations in the ACT are protected on reserved land or are located on Commonwealth land (Defence). ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSET REQUIREMENTS Environmental offset requirements for species and ecological communities in the ACT are outlined in the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy and associated documents such as the ACT Environmental Offsets Assessment Methodology and the Significant Species Database. In the Assessment Methodology and Database, some of the threatened species have special offset requirements to ensure appropriate protection. The Canberra Spider Orchid has been determined to not be able to withstand further loss in the ACT so offsets for this species are not appropriate. SURVEY, MONITORING AND RESEARCH Monitoring of Canberra Spider Orchid populations has improved understanding of the ecology and population trends of the species. The ACT Government monitors the condition of all populations on Territory land and collects data on the size of populations as required. Surveys for undiscovered populations of Canberra Spider Orchid have previously occurred; continuing to undertake surveys to improve our understanding of the distribution of the species in the ACT is a priority. Other future monitoring and research projects should aim to improve knowledge of:.
PART B 141 → →the life history and ecology of the species, including plant and seed longevity → →how the frequency, seasonality and intensity of fire impacts the species and its habitat → →the genetic variation within and between populations of the species and the genetic viability of the current seed bank → →how habitat fragmentation and reduced population size impacts genetic variability of the species → →the reliance on, and limitations of, appropriate pollinators and symbiotic fungi → →potential refugia sites for the Canberra Spider Orchid under a changing climate → →suitable seed collection methods and methods for establishing new populations via translocation → →the links between the persistence and fluctuations in abundance of the species, and abiotic and biotic variables (including disturbance, predation, vegetation dominance and structure, and soil moisture, chemistry and temperatures). MANAGEMENT The Canberra Spider Orchid persists as small, fragmented populations across the ACT that are at high risk of local extinction. Thus, the management priorities for the species are to maintain and enhance site condition and undertaking translocation projects. Specifically, priority management actions include: → →develop an annual monitoring program for all known sites, including habitat condition assessment → →manage biomass to maintain an open, heterogeneous habitat structure and diverse floristic composition within populations → →control invasive plants that pose a threat to a population or site → →maintain an ex-situ population (seed bank and orchard) → →reduce the impacts of vehicle movement, trampling, soil disturbance and over grazing → →limit the public availability of information regarding the location of populations → →increase the size of existing populations and establish new populations through translocation. All translocation projects undertaken must be consistent with the principles outlined in the Conservator Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna in the ACT (ACT Government 2017) and the Guidelines for the Translocation of Threatened Plants in Australia (3rd Ed.) (Commander et al 2018). IMPLEMENTATION → →Implementation of this action plan and the ACT Woodland Conservation Strategy will require: → →information identified in threatened species actions plans and other relevant documents to inform land planning and management on ACT Government Land → →allocation of adequate resources to undertake the actions specified in the strategy and action plans → →liaison with other jurisdictions (particularly NSW) with responsibility for the conservation of a threatened species or community → →collaboration with universities, CSIRO, ANBG and other research institutions to undertake research → →collaboration with non-government organisations such as Greening Australia to undertake on-ground actions → →collaboration with the community, where relevant, to assist with monitoring and other on- ground actions, and to help raise community awareness of conservation issues..
142 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS AND INDICATORS Table 1: Objectives, Actions and Indicators OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Protect all populations from unintended impacts (unintended impacts are those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process). 1a.  Apply formal measures to ensure all populations are protected from unintended impacts (including recreation, infrastructure works and other potentially damaging activities). All populations are protected from unintended impacts by appropriate formal measures. 1b.  Encourage other jurisdictions to protect sites where the species occurs on their lands from unintended impacts. 1c.  Ensure protection measures require site management to conserve the species. Protection measures include requirement for conservation management. MAINTAIN 2.  Manage the species and its habitat to maintain the potential for evolutionary development in the wild. 2a.  Monitor populations and the effects of management actions. Trends in abundance are known. Management actions are recorded. 2b.  Manage to conserve the species and its habitat. Populations are stable or increasing. Habitat is managed appropriately (indicated by maintenance of appropriate sward/shrub structure and herbage mass). Potential threats (e.g. weeds) are avoided or managed. 2c. Maintain a database of sightings of the species, and if available, record habitat information. Records of sightings are maintained and used to determine the distribution of the species in the ACT..
PART B 143 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR IMPROVE 3.  Enhance the long-term viability of populations through management of adjacent grassland/woodland to increase habitat area and connect populations. 3a.  Manage grassland/woodland adjacent to the species’ habitat to increase habitat area or habitat connectivity. Grassland/woodland adjacent to or linking habitat is managed to improve suitability for the species (indicated by an appropriate sward structure and plant species composition). 3b.  Undertake or facilitate research and trials into techniques for increasing the population size. Research trials have been undertaken to increase the size of the population. The population is stable or increasing. 4.  Expand the range of the species in the ACT by providing suitable habitat and establishing new populations by translocation 4a.  Undertake or facilitate research and trials into establishing new populations. Research and trials have been undertaken to establish new populations. New population(s) established. 5.  Improved understanding of the species’ ecology, habitat and threats. 5a.  Undertake or facilitate research on habitat requirements, techniques to manage habitat, and aspects of ecology directly relevant to conservation of the species. Research undertaken and reported and where appropriate applied to the conservation management of the species. COLLABORATE 6.  Promote a greater awareness of, and strengthen stakeholder and community engagement in, the conservation of the species. 6a.  Undertake or facilitate stakeholder and community engagement and awareness activities. Engagement and awareness activities undertaken and reported..
144 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The illustration of the species was prepared for the ACT Government by John Pratt. COMMUNICATIONS Linde, C. 2018 (personal communication). REFERENCES ACT Government. (2017). Conservator Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna in the ACT. Canberra. Armstrong, R. C., Turner, K. D., McDougall, K. L., Rehwinkel, R., & Crooks, J. I. (2013). Plant communities of the upper Murrumbidgee Catchment in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. Cunninghamia, A Journal of Plant Ecology For Eastern Australia, 13(1), 125-266. Baines, G., Webster, M., Cook, E., Johnston, L., & Seddon, J. (2013). The vegetation of the Kowen, Majura and Jerrabomberra districts of the Australian Capital Territory. Technical report 28. Canberra: Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. Commander, L. E., Coates, D. J., Broadhurst, L., Offord, C. A., Makinson, R. O., & Matthes, M. (2018). Guidelines for the Translocation of Threatened Plants in Australia (Vol. Third Edition). Canberra: Australian Network for Plant Conservation. Frawley, K. (2010). Action Plan for the Canberra Spider Orchid (Arachnorchis actensis). Canberra: ACT Government. Hayashi, T. (2016). Orchid encounters: ecological and evolutionary implications of pollination by sexual deception in eastern Australian Caladenia (Orchidaceae). Honours Thesis. (Australian National University ). Jenkins, B. (2000). Soil Landscapes of the Canberra 1:100,000 Sheet Report. Sydney. Jones, D. L., & Clements, M. A. (1999). Caladenia actensis (Orchidaceae), a new species from the Australian Capital Territory. The Orchadian, 12(11), 522–525. Milburn, P. J. (2008). Survey of the current status of the Canberra Spider Orchid Arachnorchis actensis. Spring 2008. Unpublished Report. Milburn, P. J., & Rouse, D. T. (2004). Nomination of Arachnorchis actensis (D.L. Jones & M.A. Clements) D.L. Jones & M.A. Clements - for consideration as an endangered species in the Australian Capital Territory under the Nature Conservation Act 1980 (A1980–20) Unpublished, nomination to ACT Flora and Fauna Committee, Environment ACT, Canberra..
PART B 145 SCARLET ROBIN PETROICA BOODANG ACTION PLAN.
146 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY BACKGROUND The Scarlet Robin (Petroica multicolor) was declared a vulnerable species on 20 May 2015 (Instrument No. DI2015-88) under the former Nature Conservation Act 1980 (NC Act 1980). The declaration followed a recommendation by the Flora and Fauna Committee, guided by criteria formerly set out in Instrument No. DI2008-170 (Table 1). On 3 June 2015 the Committee recommended the scientific name for the Scarlet Robin be changed to P. boodang following a molecular study (Kearns et al 2015) and a revision of the taxonomy of Australian passerine bird species (Dickinson and Christidis 2014). The NC Act 1980 was repealed and replaced with the current Nature Conservation Act 2014 (NC Act 2014) on 11 June 2015. Part 2.4 of the NC Act 2014 established the Scientific Committee to replace the Flora and Fauna Committee. On 29 July 2015 (Instrument No.NI2015-438) listings of threatened species as declared under the NC Act 1980, including the formerly declared vulnerable species, the Scarlet Robin, were listed under the NC Act 2014. The scientific name of the Scarlet Robin was updated to P. boodang on 30 May 2016. CRITERIA SATISFIED Species is observed, estimated, inferred or suspected to be at risk of premature extinction in the ACT region in the medium term future, as demonstrated by: 2.2  Current serious decline in population or distribution from evidence based on direct observation, including comparison of historic and current records. 2.2.1  Subsection 100(a)(i) of the NC Act 2014 outlines requirements for action plans. Measures proposed in this action plan complement those proposed in the action plan for Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland (ACT Government 2004) and for listed threatened woodland bird species such as the Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata), Brown Treecreeper (Climateris picumnus), White-winged Triller (Lalage sueurii), Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera), Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta), Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia), Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) and Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor). DESCRIPTION The Scarlet Robin is 12–14 centimetres in length and averages 13 grams in weight. Adult male birds have bold red, black and white plumage and females are brownish with a red/orange wash on the breast (Pizzey and Knight 2012) (Figures 1a and 1b). Young birds resemble the adult female. Figure 1: Male (top) and female (bottom) Scarlet Robin. G. Dabb. Scarlet Robins are one of three red breasted robins in Australia, the others being the Flame Robin (P. phoenicea) and the Red Capped Robin (P. goodenovii). Scarlet Robins are distinguishable from the other red breasted robins by the obvious white forehead and red wash on the breast in females. Unlike the Flame Robin, the red breast plumage colour of Scarlet Robins does not continue up the throat to the bill. Male Scarlet Robins also lack a scarlet cap and females lack a dull reddish wash on the forehead, which distinguishes them from the Red Capped Robin (Pizzey and Knight 2012).Male Scarlet RobinFemale Scarlet Robin.
PART B 147 Figure 2: Distribution of Scarlet Robin in the ACTDistribution of Scarlet Robin in the ACT.
148 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY DISTRIBUTION Scarlet Robins are found in south-eastern Australia (extreme south-east Queensland to Tasmania, western Victoria and south-east South Australia) and south-west Western Australia. In NSW the species occupies open forests and woodlands from the coast to the inland slopes (Higgins and Peter 2002), with dispersing birds sometimes appearing in autumn or winter on the eastern fringe of the inland plains (NSW Scientific Committee 2010). Scarlet Robins are distributed widely across the ACT in eucalypt woodlands and dry, open forest, particularly where shrubs, logs, coarse woody debris and native grasses are present (they are generally absent from open areas where no trees remain) (Taylor and COG 1992). Figure 2 shows a distribution map of Scarlet Robins in the ACT, summarised for 1 July 1982 to 30 June 2014 and based on records of observations submitted to Canberra Ornithologists Group (COG) and eBird Australia (COG 2015a). In the warmer months, Scarlet Robins are found mainly at higher altitude in the foothills of the ranges in open forest and shrubby habitats. Occupancy rates decline significantly at higher elevations over the cooler months; birds are more often seen in lowland woodland, peri- urban woodland, grazed paddocks with scattered trees, gardens and parklands at lower altitude during autumn and winter (Taws et al 2012). The current COG Annotated Checklist describes the Scarlet Robin as an ‘Uncommon breeding resident/ altitudinal migrant’ in the ACT (COG 2015b). The records of Scarlet Robin (Figure 2) were supplied by Canberra Ornithologists Group (COG Database), including from eBird Australia (eBird Australia 2016) and excluding the Garden Bird Survey data (COG 2014). The distribution of Scarlet Robins has been summarised for 187x2.5 minute grids covering the ACT and the Googong Reservoir in NSW, currently managed by the ACT. The mapping classes recognise natural breaks inherent in the data to best group similar values using Jenk’s Natural Breaks algorithm (Jenks 1967). POPULATION TRENDS Analysis of data from COG’s Woodland Bird Survey (Bounds et al 2010) found strong evidence of decline in Scarlet Robin abundance in the ACT. More recent research has confirmed the species as one of five woodland-dependent species showing a long term decline in abundance over 14 years (Rayner 2015 PhD thesis unpubl.). The study analysed 56 species, with the Grey Shrike-thrush, Mistletoebird, Striated Thornbill and Tree Martin also being found to be in decline. Scarlet Robins have been classified as one of three ‘urban avoider’ bird species (i.e. native birds that show a long-term declining population in the ACT), in addition to the Striated Thornbill and Rufous Whistler. Urban avoider species are: more likely to be observed at sites at an increasing distance from the urban fringe (0–3 kilometres), are likely to be migratory or dispersive species, and are likely to be smaller-bodied, woodland- dependent species that rely on mid to upper canopy structures for nesting (Rayner et al 2015). CONSERVATION STATUS The listed conservation status of the Scarlet Robins is as follows: → →Australian Capital Territory: Vulnerable, Section 91 Nature Conservation Act 2014; Special Protection Status species, Section 109 Nature Conservation Act 2014. → →New South Wales: Vulnerable, listed in Part 1 of Schedule 2 and Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995. → →South Australia: Rare, listed as ‘P. m. boodang (eastern subspecies)’ in Schedule 9 National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972..
PART B 149 HABITAT AND ECOLOGY Appendix 1(a) describes the habitat and ecology of Scarlet Robins in detail. THREATS Following a detailed literature review of the habitat and ecology of Scarlet Robins in eastern Australia, four key threats to maintaining a viable, stable and breeding population in the ACT have been identified. The four key threats, in decreasing order of significance, are: → →Habitat loss and degradation → →Predation → →Climate change → →Competition Appendix 1(b) documents the four key threats in detail, citing sources from the scientific literature OBJECTIVES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS Five management objectives have been identified, each to be achieved by management actions, to address the risk of premature extinction of Scarlet Robin. OBJECTIVES 1. Identify, protect and restore Scarlet Robin breeding and foraging habitat. 2. Manage habitat to conserve Scarlet Robin. 3. Undertake and support survey, monitoring and research. 4. Co-operate with state and local government agencies. 5. Increase community awareness of, and engagement in, managing Scarlet Robin as a vulnerable species. ACTIONS Table 1 identifies the proposed management actions and indicators against each of the objectives.
150 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Table 1: Key objectives, actions and indicators OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Identify, protect and restore Scarlet Robin breeding and foraging habitat. 1a.  Map the location and extent of breeding and foraging habitat of Scarlet Robin in the ACT. Maps of breeding sites and the current extent of foraging habitat occupied by Scarlet Robin are prepared. 1b.  Protect Scarlet Robin populations from unintended impacts (unintended impacts are those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process). Scarlet Robin populations are considered in the development approval process. 1c.  Improve degraded breeding and foraging habitat by replacing missing structural layers and increasing the size of habitat patches by planting locally indigenous trees and shrubs. The area of currently occupied breeding and foraging habitat for Scarlet Robin is stable or increasing. Restoration activities have created more structurally diverse habitat for Scarlet Robin. 1d.  Undertake restoration activities to connect isolated habitat for Scarlet Robin. Targeted restoration activities have improved habitat connectivity for Scarlet Robin. MAINTAIN 2.  Manage habitat to conserve Scarlet Robin. 2a. Distribute coarse woody debris (or similar ground layer enhancement treatments) in known (or potential) breeding or foraging habitat for Scarlet Robin. Area of breeding or foraging habitat enhanced by placement of coarse woody debris (or similar ground layer enhancement treatments) has increased. 2b. Continue to expand cat containment areas in new suburbs where they coincide with known Scarlet Robin breeding sites or potential breeding habitat Cat containment policy is implemented in all new suburbs that coincide with Scarlet Robin habitat. 2c. In areas of known Scarlet Robin habitat, replace woody (berry- bearing) invasive plants with locally indigenous species (e.g. Acacia dealbata, Bursaria sp., and Allocasuarina verticillata) Area of exotic trees or shrubs cleared and replaced with locally indigenous species has increased..
PART B 151 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR IMPROVE 3.  Undertake and support survey, monitoring and research. 3a.  Undertake and/or support monitoring initiatives that track changes in population abundance and distribution. Data on population abundance and distribution are collected and mapped . 3b.  Undertake and/or support research initiatives to fill gaps in knowledge of Scarlet Robin, including: → →responses to climate change (e.g. timing of breeding and arrival/departure) → →vulnerability to predators → →critical habitat parameters (i.e. canopy cover, shrub cover, ground cover, logs, fallen branches and litter) → →seasonal migration/movements and habitat corridors. At least one research project is initiated within the first five years of the action plan’s commencement. COLLABORATE 4.  Co-operate with state and local government agencies. 4a.  Support cross-jurisdictional conservation research and monitoring activities. At least one cross-jurisdictional research or monitoring initiative is undertaken. 5.  Increase community awareness of, and engagement in, managing Scarlet Robin as a vulnerable species. 5a.  Collaborate with community groups and citizen science groups to promote incidental and systematic data collection of Scarlet Robin sightings. Community group activities are actively supported and records are collected. 5b.  Undertake community engagement and awareness raising activities to disseminate research and monitoring findings to inform the conservation of Scarlet Robin. Engagement activities are undertaken. 5c.  Encourage landowners to manage areas to improve habitat for Scarlet Robin (e.g. rotational grazing, promote shrub and tree regeneration). Increased awareness and participation by rural landholders to improve habitat that is suitable for Scarlet Robin..
152 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY BOX 1 - ADAPTIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT The Adaptive Resource Management (ARM) approach was conceived as a technical–ecological model to deal with uncertainty (Walters and Holling 1990, Allan 2007). Consequently ARM involves learning from implementation; learning opportunities need to be identified, hypotheses stated and different management treatments tested. Of necessity, ARM also focuses on the problem of using such new knowledge in policy and planning (e.g. Stankey et al 2003). The ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23 (ACT Government 2013) signals a shift away from reliance on static planning documents towards more flexible tools designed for adaptive management and feedback into implementation cycles. Interactive mapping tools may be able to be used to support ARM in the context of this action plan. Mapping of habitat and setting baselines is an essential first step in adaptive management. Statistical or mathematical models could be developed using spatially referenced and/or time- series data based on the occurrence of Scarlet Robin to predict or trade-off future management scenarios (e.g. use of prescribed fire). In most cases, in order to be readily understood, such modelled output would need to be mapped. Monitoring is crucial if learning by conservation managers is to occur and to assist in review of this action plan. Under s.108 of the NC Act 2014 the Conservator of Flora and Fauna must monitor the effectiveness of an action plan and make the findings publicly accessible. IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW OF THIS ACTION PLAN Implementation of this action plan will result in new knowledge about the habitat and ecology of the Scarlet Robin. This knowledge should inform implementation of relevant actions in this action plan. To emphasise the importance of new knowledge in implementing this action plan, specific benchmarks have been included for three actions to highlight the need to implement these actions as a high priority. These actions are numbered 1a, 1b and 3c (see Table 1). New knowledge will also inform review of the action plan. Under s.108 of the NC Act 2014 the Conservator of Flora and Fauna must report to the Minister about each action plan at least once every five years and make the report publicly accessible within 30 days. The Scientific Committee must review an action plan every 10 years, or at any other time at the Conservator’s request..
PART B 153 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This action plan was prepared by the Conservator of Flora and Fauna situated in the Environment and Planning Directorate, ACT Government. Use of the bird database held by the Canberra Ornithologists Group is gratefully acknowledged. GLOSSARY Altitudinal migrant: A species that breeds at higher altitude in summer and migrates to lower altitude areas in winter. Breeding record: A breeding record for P. boodang, including any of the following activities: carrying food (‘cf’), copulation (‘co’), display (‘di’) or dependent young (‘dy’). Critical habitat: Habitat that is critical to the survival of a species or ecological community (Dictionary, s.3 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014.) Congeneric: A species which is a member of the same genus as another species. Dependent: A bird fed by its parents. Dispersing: A species spreading to other areas, often after breeding has ceased. Migrant: A bird that moves between locations in a regular annual cycle, usually breeding in one and wintering in another. Nesting recorded: A breeding record for P. boodang including any of the following nesting activities: sitting on (‘on’), building a nest (‘nb), a nest with eggs (‘ne’) or a nest with young (‘ny’). Passerine: A member of the order Passeriformes, a perching song- bird with three forward-pointing toes and one rear- pointing toe..
154 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY APPENDIX 1(A) HABITAT AND ECOLOGY Scarlet Robins live in dry eucalypt forest and woodlands, usually with trees and shrubs present and an open or grassy understorey. The species lives in both mature and regrowth vegetation. It occasionally occurs in wet forest or near wetlands. Shrub cover, native grasses, a healthy eucalypt canopy, abundant logs and fallen timber are important components of its habitat (Taws et al 2012). Scarlet Robins are quiet and unobtrusive foragers found on or near the ground and on branches and the trunks of shrubs and trees (Frith 1984, Higgins and Peter 2002). They forage from low perches, fence-posts, tree trunks, logs or the ground, pouncing on small insects and other invertebrates. They sometimes forage in the shrub or canopy layer. Birds usually occur singly or in pairs, occasionally in small family parties. Pairs stay together all year round. In autumn and winter they join mixed flocks of other small insectivorous birds that forage through dry forests and woodlands. Scarlet Robins breed on ridges, hills and foothills of the western slopes, the Great Dividing Range and eastern coastal regions of NSW; and occasionally breeds up to 1000 metres in altitude. A similar pattern of breeding occurs in the ACT. Scarlet Robins form breeding pairs that defend a breeding territory. They mainly breed between July and January although in recent years earliest breeding dates in the ACT have tended to be later in August or early September (COG 2014, 2015a). Scarlet Robins may raise two or three broods a season. The nest, an open cup made of plant fibres and cobwebs, is often built in the fork of a tree that is usually more than two metres above the ground. Nests are often found in a dead branch on a live tree or in a dead tree or shrub. Eggs are pale greenish-, bluish- or brownish-white, with brown spots; clutch size ranges from one to four. The generation time of the species has been estimated at five years based on the congeneric Flame Robin (Garnett and Crowley 2000). CRITICAL HABITAT For the purposes of this action plan, the critical habitat of the Scarlet Robin is defined as its breeding habitat in open forest and woodland areas..
PART B 155 APPENDIX 1(B) THREATS HABITAT LOSS AND DEGRADATION The main threat to the Scarlet Robin is the loss of its open forest or woodland breeding and foraging habitat (NSW Scientific Committee 2010) and habitat degradation (Radford and Bennett 2007). In comparing surveyed woodland sites stratified by habitat and land use category, the species was found to be less common in habitat patches less than: → →30 hectares in area with no tree cover within → →200 metres and less than 2% cover within 1 kilometre → →less common at sites surrounded by cattle grazing → →absent from sites surrounded by cereal cropping (Barrett et al 2003). Nest sites, food sources and foraging substrates (i.e. standing dead timber, log and coarse woody debris) are susceptible to depletion by firewood collection and ‘tidying up’ of rough pasture (e.g. mowing, slashing) and overgrazing (Recher et al 2002, Olsen et al 2005). However, the occurrence (presence/absence) of Scarlet Robins can be positively associated with habitat patch size and components of habitat complexity such as increasing tree canopy cover, shrub cover, ground cover, logs, fallen branches and litter (Watson et al 2003). Habitat for Scarlet Robins may become unsuitable if dense regeneration (e.g. wattles) occurs after bushfires in forest or woodland. Research into bird and animal responses to fire in dry forests and woodlands has identified Scarlet Robins as a ‘Response C’ species. Response C species show a long-term decline post- fire with or without a short-term increase in numbers. Although the response may be favourable to these species in the short term, regeneration of the shrub layer renders the habitat unsuitable after a few years. Eventual species recovery is expected as the shrub layer thins out over time. However, there is insufficient knowledge about when this would happen (MacHunter et al 2009). PREDATION Open nesting, small, passerine birds (e.g. robins, flycatchers, whistlers and honeyeaters) experience poor nesting success in fragmented and degraded eucalypt woodlands (Woinarski 1985, Robinson 1990, Ford et al 2001, Higgins and Peter 2002). The Pied Currawong Strepera graculina is a nest predator whose population has increased significantly in eastern Australia to become a common breeding bird in urban and peri-urban areas (NSW Scientific Committee 2010). A Pied Currawong population increase is also evident in urban Canberra (COG 2009, COG 2015c). Debus (2006 a,b) investigated whether the Pied Currawong has become a threat to the breeding productivity of the Scarlet Robin and Yellow Robin (Eopsaltria australis) by testing whether culling of currawongs during the robins’ breeding season led to increased breeding success in remnant woodland at Imbota, near Armidale, northern NSW. Debus found that culling led to a twofold increase in nest success, higher fledgling rates and increased nest survival rates for both robin species. The study confirmed that predation by the Pied Currawong was a major cause of nest failure together with a wide range of other nest predators (e.g. mammals and reptiles) in the cull area (Debus 2006a,b). Barratt (1997) studied predation by house cats on wildlife in Canberra. Information on the composition of vertebrate prey caught by cats was collected by recording prey deposited at cat owners’ residences over 12 months. A total of 1961 prey items comprising 67 species were collected or reported. Birds comprised 27% of the total (14% native, 10% introduced, 3% unidentified). Of the 47 bird species identified as prey, 41 were native bird species. On Norfolk Island the Scarlet Robin (P. multicolor, formerly P. b. multicolor) is thought to be affected by cat (Felis catus) and black rat (Rattus rattus) predation and cat and rat control measures were recommended (Director of National Parks 2010; Garnett and Franklin 2014). Predation by feral cats (F. catus) and robbing of nests and predation of fledgling by rats (Rattus sp.) are recognised as threats to the Scarlet Robin in NSW (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage 2016a)..
156 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CLIMATE CHANGE An assessment of the likely response of the Scarlet Robin to climate change has been undertaken as part of the Climate Change Adaptation Plan for Australian Birds (Garnett and Franklin 2014). The comparison of climate suitability for the Scarlet Robin showed the suitability as mapped for 1985 contracting southwards by about 50% in total area by 2085, but remaining relatively extensive and including the entire ACT within the modelled species distribution. The two Australian mainland subspecies P. b. boodang (eastern Australia) and P. b. campbelli (south- western Australia) were assessed as being of ‘medium’ sensitivity to climate change (Garnett and Franklin 2014). COMPETITION The Australian Government (March 2013) and the NSW Government (September 2013) have listed the ‘Aggressive exclusion of birds from forest or woodland habitat by abundant Noisy Miners’ (Manorina melanocephala) as a Key Threatening Process under legislation (Department of Environment 2014). In making the declaration, the NSW Scientific Committee recognised Scarlet Robins as one species of a range of listed threatened species which may be adversely affected by aggressive exclusion by abundant Noisy Miners (NSW Scientific Committee 2013). The Noisy Miner has benefited from the large- scale vegetation changes, such as fragmentation, that accompanied European settlement of Australia (Higgins et al 2001; Grey et al 2010, Maron et al 2011) and, as a result, has increased in abundance (Szabo et al 2010). In the ACT, since 1991 the reporting rate for the Noisy Miner in COG’s Annual Bird Report increased from 4.3% to 21% in 2010–11 (COG 2015d). Data analysis from across south- eastern Australia has shown Noisy Miner densities of 0.8/ hectare or larger are strongly negatively correlated with small to medium sized native birds (Mac Nally et al 2012). The experimental removal of Noisy Miners from habitat patches results in the re-colonisation of small to medium sized birds (Grey et al 1997, 1998; Debus 2008) even in the absence of restoration of habitat structure. FURTHER INFORMATION Further information on this action plan or other threatened species and ecological communities can be obtained from: Environment and Planning Directorate, ACT Government Phone: 13 22 81 Website: http://www.environment.act PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS Ms Jenny Bounds, Conservation Officer, Canberra Ornithologists Group. Dr Laura Rayner, Post-doctoral Fellow, Fenner School of Environment and Society, Australian National University. David McDonald, Mark Clayton, Canberra Ornithologists Group. Paul Fennell, Data Manager, Canberra Ornithologists Group..
PART B 157 REFERENCES ACT Government. (2004). Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservaton Strategy Canberra. ACT Government. (2013). ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2013–23 Canberra: Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate. Allan, C. (2007). Adaptive management of natural resources. In A. L. Wilson, D. R.L, W. R.K, P. K.J, B. K.H, & C. A (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th Australian Stream Management Conference. Australian Rivers: making a difference. Thurgoona, New South Wales Charles Sturt University. Barratt, D. G. (1997). Predation by House Cats, Felis catus (L.), in Canberra, Australia. I. Prey composition and preference. Wildlife Research, 24(3), 263-277. Barrett, G. (2003). The new atlas of Australian birds. Hawthorn East, Vic: Birds Australia. Bounds, J., Taws, N., & Cunningham, R. (2010). A statistical analysis of trends in occupancy rates of woodland birds in the ACT, December 1998 to December 2008: the ten-year data analysis. Canberra bird notes volume 35, number 3 December 2010. Canberra: Canberra Ornithologists Group. Canberra Ornithologists Group. (2009). Birds of Canberra Gardens (Second Edition ed.). Canberra: Canberra Ornithologists Group Inc. Canberra Ornithologists Group. (2014). Annual Bird Report: 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang). Canberra Bird Notes, 39(1). Canberra Ornithologists Group. (2015a). Annotated Checklist of the Birds of the Australian Capital Territory. 17 December 2014. Canberra Ornithologists Group. (2015b). Annual Bird Report: 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014. Noisy Miner (Manorina melanocephala). Canberra Bird Notes, 40(1). Canberra Ornithologists Group. (2015c). Annual Bird Report: 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014. Pied Currawong (Strepera graculina). Canberra Bird Notes, 40(1), 75. Canberra Ornithologists Group. (2015d). Annual Bird Report: 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014. Scarlet Robin (Petroica multicolor). Canberra Bird Notes, 40(1). Commonwealth Government. (2014). Aggressive exclusion of birds from potential woodland and forest habitat by over- abundant noisy miners (Manorina melenocephala). Minister’s Reasons for a Threat Abatement Plan decision. Date of decision -7/4/2014. Canberra. Debus, S. (2006a). The Role of Intense Nest Predation in the Decline of Scarlet Robins and Eastern Yellow Robins in Remnant Woodland Near Armidale, New South Wales. Pacific Conservation Biology, 12(4), 279-287. Debus, S. (2008). The Effect of Noisy Miners on Small Bush Birds: an Unofficial Cull and Its Outcome. Pacific Conservation Biology, 14(3), 185-190. Debus, S. J. S. (2006b). Breeding-habitat and Nest-site Characteristics of Scarlet Robins and Eastern Yellow Robins near Armidale, New South Wales. Pacific Conservation Biology, 12(4), 261-271. Dickinson, E. C., & Christidis, L. (2014). The Howard and Moore Complete Checklist of the Birds of the World (Vol. Volume 2: Passerines, pp. 752): Aves Press. Director of National Parks. (2010). Norfolk Island Region Threatened Species Recovery Plan. Canberra. eBird Australia. (2016). eBird: An online database of bird distribution and abundance [web application]. Ford, H. A., Barrett, G. W., Saunders, D. A., & Recher, H. F. (2001). Why have birds in the woodlands of Southern Australia declined? Biological Conservation, 97(1), 71-88. Frith, H. J. e. (1984). Birds in the Australian High Country (Revised edition ed.). Sydney Angus and Robertson. Garnett, S. T., & Crowley. (2000). The Action Plan for Australian Birds. Canberra. Garnett, S. T., & Franklin, D. C. (2014). Climate Change Adaptation Plan for Australian Birds. Australia: CSIRO Publishing..
158 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Grey, M. J., Clarke, M. F., & Loyn, R. H. (1997). Initial changes in the avian communities of remnant eucalypt woodlands following a reduction in the abundance of Noisy Miners, Manorina melanocephala. Wildlife Research, 24(6), 631-648. Grey, M. J., Clarke, M. F., & Loyn, R. H. (1998). Influence of the Noisy Miner Manorina Melanocephala on Avian Diversity and Abundance in Remnant Grey Box Woodland. Pacific Conservation Biology, 4(1), 55-69. Grey, M. J., Clarke, M. F., & Taylor, R. (2010). The impact of the Noisy Miner (Manorina melanocephala) on woodland birds and possible mitigation strategies: a review with recommendations: Report to the Department of Sustainability and Environment, Victoria by Latrobe University. Higgins, P. J., & Peter, J. M. (2002). Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic Birds (Vol. Volume 6. Pardalotes to Spangled Drongo). Melbourne: Oxford University Press. Higgins, P. J., Peter, J. M., & Steele, W. K. (2001). Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic birds (Vol. Volume 5. Tyrant-flycatchers to Chats). Melbourne: Oxford University Press. Jenks, G. F. (1967). The Data Model Concept in Statistical Mapping. International Yearbook of Cartography, 7, 186–190. Kearns, A., Joseph, L., White, L., Austin, J., Baker, C., Driskell, A., Malloy, J., & Omland, K. (2016). Norfolk Island Robins are a distinct endangered species: ancient DNA unlocks surprising relationships and phenotypic discordance within the Australo-Pacific Robins. Conservation Genetics, 17(2), 321-335. Mac Nally, R., Bowen, M., Howes, A., McAlpine, C. A., & Maron, M. (2012). Despotic, high-impact species and the subcontinental scale control of avian assemblage structure. Ecology, 93(3), 668-678. MacHunter, P., Menkhorst, P., & Loyn, R. (2009). Towards a Process for Integrating Vertebrate Fauna into Fire Management Planning. Victoria. Maron, M., Main, A., Bowen, M., Howes, A., Kath, J., Pillette, C., & McAlpine, C. A. (2011). Relative influence of habitat modification and interspecific competition on woodland bird assemblages in eastern Australia (Vol. 111, pp. 40-51): Taylor & Francis. NSW Government. (2016). Scarlet Robin – Profile. Threats. NSW Scientific Committee. (2010). Scarlet Robin Petroica boodang (Lesson 1838) – vulnerable species listing. Final determination. NSW Scientific Committee. (2013). Noisy Miner Manorina meleanocephala – key threatening process listing. Final determination. NSW. Olsen, P., Weston, M., Tzaros, C., & Silcocks, A. (2005). The State of Australia’s Birds 2005: Woodlands and Birds. Supplement to Wingspan, 15, 32. Pizzey, G., & Knight. (2012). The field guide to the birds of Australia. Pymble, N.S.W: HarperCollins Publishers. Radford, J. Q., & Bennett, A. F. (2007). The relative importance of landscape properties for woodland birds in agricultural environments. Journal of Applied Ecology, 44(4), 737-747. Rayner, L. (2015). Chapter II. The influence of weather on long-term population trends of birds in an endangered ecological community’ of Conserving Woodland Birds: the need for population data in evidence-based planning. ANU PhD thesis (part). (Australian National University, Unpublished). Rayner, L., Ikin, K., Evans, M. J., Gibbons, P., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Manning, A. D. (2015). Avifauna and urban encroachment in time and space. Diversity and Distributions, 21(4), 428-440. Recher, H. F., Davis, W. E., & Calver, M. C. (2002). Comparative foraging ecology of five species of ground-pouncing birds in Western Australian woodlands with comments on species decline. Ornithological Science, 29-40. Robinson, D. (1990). The nesting ecology of sympatric Scarlet Robin Petroica multicolor and Flame Robin P. phoenicea populations in open eucalypt forest. Emu, 90, 40-52. Szabo, J. K., Vesk, P. A., Baxter, P. W. J., & Possingham, H. P. (2010). Regional avian species declines estimated from volunteer-collected long-term data using List Length Analysis.
 Ecological Applications, 20(8), 2157-2169. Taws, N., Bounds, J., Rowell, A., & Cunningham, R. (2012). An analysis of bird occupancy and habitat changes at six woodland locations - 2003 and 2010. Canberra: Canberra Ornithologist Group Taylor, M., & Canberra Ornithologists Group. (1992). Birds of the Australian Capital Territory. An Atlas: Canberra Ornithologists Group and the National Capital Development Authority..
PART B 159 Walters, C., & Holling, C. (1990). Large-scale management experiments and learning by doing. Ecology, 71(6), 2060. Watson, J., Watson, A., Paull, D., & Freudenberger, D. (2002). Woodland Fragmentation is Causing the Decline of Species and Functional Groups of Birds in Southeastern Australia. Pacific Conservation Biology, 8(4), 261-270. Woinarski, J. C. K. (1985). Breeding biology and life history of small insectivorous birds in Australian forests: response to a stable environment? Proceedings Ecological Society Australia, 14, 159-168..
PART B 161 SMALL PURPLE PEA SWAINSONA RECTA ACTION PLAN.
162 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY PREAMBLE The Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta, A.T. Lee 1948) was declared an endangered species on 15 April 1996 (Instrument No. DI1996-29 under the Nature Conservation Act 1980). Under section 101 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing a draft action plan for listed species. The first action plan for this species was prepared in 1998 (ACT Government 1998). This revised edition supersedes the earlier edition. Measures proposed in this action plan complement those proposed in the action plans for Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, Natural Temperate Grassland and component threatened species such as the Tarengo Leek Orchid, Brown Treecreeper and Canberra Spider Orchid. CONSERVATION STATUS The Small Purple Pea is declared a threatened species in line with the following legislation: → →National: Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Endangered). → →Australian Capital Territory: Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Endangered) and Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Special Protection Status Species) → →New South Wales: Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016 (Endangered) → →Victoria: Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 (Threatened) CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES The objective of this action plan is to preserve the Small Purple Pea in perpetuity in the wild across its natural geographic range in the ACT and contribute to the regional and national conservation of the species. Specific objectives of the action plan are to: → →protect sites where the species is known to occur in the ACT from unintended impacts → →manage the species and its habitat to maintain the potential for evolutionary development in the wild → →improve the long-term viability of populations through management of adjacent woodland to increase habitat area → →expand the range of the species in the ACT by identifying suitable habitat and establishing new populations by translocation → →improve the understanding of the species’ ecology, habitat and threats → →strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of the species. SPECIES DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY DESCRIPTION The Small Purple Pea is a slender, erect perennial plant that produces several rigid stems 20-30 cm high. It has a thick taproot that can extend at least 60 cm below the soil surface (NSW OEH 2012). The leaves of the species are odd pinnate, they are composed of 7-11 narrow leaflets, 5-7cm long. The terminal leaflet is distinctly longer than adjacent laterals. The species produces 10-21 racemes (that range from 10-27cm long), which bear purple or blue-purple flowers that are 5-6mm long. Individual flowers are borne on short recurved stalks, 0.1-0.3 cm long; they have two distinct white spots or short stripes on the base of the standard (central) petal (NSW OEH 2012). The pods are rounded–oblong (7-11 mm long and 4-6 mm wide) and are hairless except along the suture and base. Pods contain several small, hard-coated kidney shaped seeds that are approximately 2 mm long (Briggs and Leigh 1990, Leigh and Briggs 1992)..
PART B 163 DISTRIBUTION In the past, the Small Purple Pea was relatively widespread; it has been recorded in north-eastern Victoria and the South and Central Western Slopes and Tablelands of NSW. Over the past 80 years the known range of the species has declined considerably; its distribution is now fragmented into two clusters of populations, one in central eastern NSW (between Wellington and Mudgee) and the other in the Canberra – Williamsdale district. Young (2001) found a moderate genetic difference between the populations in the central eastern NSW region and those in the ACT. A single plant was found near Glenrowan, Victoria in 1995 but has since died (NSW OEH 2012). In 1996, the largest known population comprised approximately 3,400 plants; these plants continue to persist along 22 km of railway easement from Tralee to Williamsdale along the ACT/NSW border (Briggs 1994, Briggs and Müeller 1997). In 2010 a large population of more than 1,000 plants was discovered nearby, on private land in the Williamsdale area. Another population of 4,200 plants was discovered on Mount Arthur near Wellington in 2011. This discovery increased the local population to 4,576 individuals. Other sites in NSW where the species survives includes Burrendong (160 plants), Mudgee (270 plants), Burra (100 plants), Mandurama (10 plants) and Guises Creek (50 plants) (Briggs and Leigh 1990, NSW OEH 2012). The total known population in NSW is approximately 9,270 plants. At Mt Taylor in the ACT, over 400 individual plants have been recorded since monitoring began at the site; the highest annual count of emergent plants is 268. While recruitment of new individuals to the population each year is low, the total population at Mt Taylor is considered to be stable. A small population of the species persists in the suburb of Kambah. Twenty one plants have been recorded since monitoring began at the site; the highest annual count of emergent plants is 10. This isolated population has been fenced to protect it from unintended disturbance. No recruitment has been observed in this population. In October 2003 another population (several plants) was located in Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodland in south-east Belconnen, near Gungahlin Drive (Caswell Drive). In 2012 and 2013, 112 plants raised at the Australian National Botanic Gardens (ANBG) were translocated to 3 plots near the Gigerline Nature Reserve in the southern ACT (as part of the Icon Water Murrumbidgee to Googong Pipeline (M2G) offset project) (Eco Logical Australia 2017). The original seed for this project was sourced from three populations (Mt Taylor, Burra and Williamsdale). Approximately 32% of the translocated plants survived. In the ACT region, the Small Purple Pea was previously recorded, but no longer persists, in the following locations: Queanbeyan, Black Mountain, O’Connor, Harman and Mawson. A single plant was recorded adjacent to Long Gully Road (Isaacs Ridge) but it has not been observed since 1995. Similarly, a single plant recorded in Farrer Ridge has not been observed in the last 10 years. A map of the current distribution of this species is available on the ACT Government’s mapping portal, ACTmapi. HABITAT AND ECOLOGY In the ACT region, the Small Purple Pea occurs on grey sandy or stony loams, on all aspects of undulating terrain (Briggs and Leigh 1990). It occurs in open woodland dominated by one or more of the following canopy species: Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi), Apple Box (E. bridgesiana), Yellow Box (E. melliodora), Mealy Bundy (E. nortonii), Long-leaved Box (E. goniocalyx) or Black Cypress Pine (Callitris endlicheri). The grassy understorey is dominated by Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra), Snow Grass (Poa sieberiana var. sieberiana), Red-Anther Wallaby grass (Rytidosperma pallidum) or Spear grasses (Austrostipa spp.) The groundcover also includes a wide range of native forbs; the most common species include Bulbine Lily (Bulbine bulbosa), Common Everlasting (Chrysocephalum apiculatum), Billy Buttons (Leptorhynchos squamatus), Common Raspwort (Gonocarpus tetragynus) and Pale Sundew (Drosera peltata).
 Occasionally the understorey may have a low shrub component that includes Curved Rice- flower (Pimelea curviflora), Bitter Cryptandra (Cryptandra amara), Daphne Heath (Brachyloma daphnoides) and Leafy Bitter-pea (Daviesia mimosoides) (NSW OEH 2012, NSW OEH 2017). Most ACT sites have a mid- storey shrub layer containing Australian Blackthorn (Bursaria spinosa subsp. lasiophylla), Sifton bush (Cassinia quinquefaria), Narrow leaved hopbush (Dodonaea viscosa subsp. angustissima), Native indigo (Indigofera australis) or Burgan (Kunzea ericoides)..
164 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY The Small Purple Pea is a perennial forb that persists as woody rootstock throughout late summer and autumn. It re-sprouts between April and August and flowers during spring. Peak flowering occurs during a 2 – 3 week period in October. By the end of December, when seed is ripe, individuals enter dormancy once again (NSW OEH 2012). Insects are the primary means of pollination, and seed set is assumed to be influenced by annual climatic variation (NSW OEH 2012). Recent analysis of monitoring data from Mt Taylor suggests there is a relationship between the likelihood an individual will flower and the number of frost nights in the preceding year. A plant is most likely to flower when there are between 7 and 15 nights equal to or less than -4°C (Wilson et al. 2016). The life span of the Small Purple Pea is unknown. Individual plants have been monitored for over 30 years; it is estimated they may live up to 50 years (NSW OEH 2012). Research and monitoring programs demonstrate that fire may enhance the recruitment of populations by facilitating and / or stimulating critical stages of its reproduction. Fire is believed to facilitate re-sprouting as it removes biomass that may otherwise overcrowd new shoots (Briggs and Müller 1999, NSW OEH 2012). This association appears weaker in less disturbed sites where groundcover density is limited by a mature overstorey and thus the species is subject to less competition. Fire may also stimulate seed germination (Briggs and Müller 1999, NSW OEH 2012), however no effect on the production of seed pods has been identified (Briggs and Müller 1999). Analysis by Wilson et al. (2016) indicated a linear decline in the proportion of flowering individuals with increasing time since fire. Although re-sprouting has been observed from damaged rootstock, persistent grazing of annual shoots is likely to inhibit an individual’s capacity to continue to re-sprout (NSW OEH 2012). PREVIOUS AND CURRENT MANAGEMENT MT TAYLOR In 1996 the ACT Government commenced monitoring the population of Small Purple Pea at Mt Taylor. To better understand recruitment in the population, the ACT Government commenced tagging individual plants in 2001. Each year, previously unrecorded plants are tagged with a unique identification number (on a metal tag inserted into the ground). In 2000 an ecological burn was carried out at the site. The number of flowering plants increased over the following two springs. However, as data was not collected systematically before the burn was conducted, the exact relationship between the fire and flowering success cannot be determined. A high intensity fire burnt the site during the 2003 Canberra Bushfires. Despite the severity of the burn, and ongoing drought conditions, the population of Small Purple Pea responded by producing new spring growth and flowering that year. The number of flowering plants recorded in 2003 was the highest on record at that time. After 2003, surveys of the Mt Taylor population were not undertaken until 2009. Annual surveys have been undertaken since this time. Since 1991 the Mount Taylor Park Care group has undertaken a number of management activities within the reserve but outside the habitat area, including: the removal of woody weeds, planting native trees, shrubs and grasses, and erosion control. There is current evidence of grazing on individuals of the species at Mt Taylor (ACT Government 2015), however it is not possible to attribute this activity to specific vertebrate or invertebrate grazers without further research. In 2015 the ACT Government partnered with the ANBG to further develop the seed bank for the Small Purple Pea (and various other rare flora species) from multiple in-situ populations. In 2016, a seed orchard of the Small Purple Pea was established at the ANBG to facilitate future translocations of the species by the ACT Government..
PART B 165 KAMBAH The population in the suburb of Kambah was fenced during the 1980’s to protect the population and habitat from grazing or inadvertent damage. In 1988 and 1989 twelve plants (raised from seed collected from the Tralee-Williamsdale railway easement in NSW) were translocated to the Kambah population to increase genetic variation and recruitment. Only three of these plantings were still alive in 2009. There has been no improvement in recruitment at the site. To reduce the density of Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra) in the absence of grazing, ecological burns were conducted at the site in 2000, 2011 and 2013. Weed control has been undertaken at the Kambah site to remove Sweet Briar (Rosa rubiginosa), naturalised Prickly Spiderflower (Grevillea juniperina) and dense eucalypt regeneration. There is also current evidence of grazing on individuals of the species at Kambah (ACT Government 2015). The fence excludes both macropods and rabbits; however possums, birds and invertebrates can still access the area. Slug and snail bait has occasionally been laid at the site to control potential slug damage to Small Purple Pea plants. CASWELL DRIVE Until recent years, the population of Small Purple Pea near Caswell Drive was located on a rural lease. In addition to grazing pressures by kangaroos and rabbits, the site was subject to grazing by cattle and sheep. The site has now been incorporated into the ACT Nature Reserve System and is managed by the Parks and Conservation Service. The population has been inspected and monitored regularly since 2012; individual plants have been tagged since 2015. Translocation of plants from the ANBG to this site may be undertaken to improve genetic variation and recruitment. THREATS Urban development and agricultural practices have resulted in the loss, degradation and fragmentation of appropriate woodland habitat for the Small Purple Pea. As a result, populations of the species in the ACT are small and severely fragmented, and thus vulnerable to extinction as a result of stochastic events. Small populations are also subject to inbreeding and reduced genetic diversity; this reduces germination success and fitness within populations, and leaves them vulnerable to the impacts of disease, climate change and disturbance. Invasive plants, inappropriate fire regimes, and browsing by native and feral herbivores places additional pressure on the survival of this species (NSW OEH 2012). Young (2001) identified genetic erosion and inbreeding as a major threat facing small populations of this species. This is due, in part, to the Small Purple Pea being an autotetraploid species that is potentially self-compatible. This results in a reduction in fitness and reproductive capability, and can impact germination success, growth rates (including maximum plant weight), disease resistance, and increased accumulation of deleterious mutations (Buza et al. 2000, Young 2001). CHANGING CLIMATE A range of indirect impacts resulting from a changing climate may threaten the persistence of the species at some sites, these include increased drought conditions, changes in plant species composition (including invasive species), and fire frequency and intensity. A lack of connectivity and genetic diversity within populations is likely to reduce the resilience of the species to the impacts of climate change..
166 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY CONSERVATION ISSUES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS PROTECTION A critical element in the conservation of the Small Purple Pea is the conservation of lowland grassy woodlands, including the endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland under the Nature Conservation Act (2014). All extant populations in the ACT are protected within the ACT reserve system or are located on ACT land that is managed for conservation purposes. ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSET REQUIREMENTS Environmental offset requirements for species and ecological communities in the ACT are outlined in the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy and associated documents such as the ACT Environmental Offsets Assessment Methodology and the Significant Species Database. In the Assessment Methodology and Database, some of the threatened species have special offset requirements to ensure appropriate protection. The Small Purple Pea has been determined to have a high risk of extinction in the event of further loss of habitat in the ACT. As such, offsets for this species are not appropriate. SURVEY, MONITORING AND RESEARCH Regular monitoring of Small Purple Pea populations by the ACT Government has improved knowledge regarding the ecology and population trends of the species. Projects have been undertaken to model the influences of climatic variables on flowering within the Mt Taylor population (Wilson et al. 2016). The ACT Government partners with the ANBG to collect and bank the seed from various threatened plant species in the ACT, including the Small Purple Pea. There is approximately 3,400 Small Purple Pea seeds banked from populations in the ACT region. Due to the small size of ACT populations and the challenges in collecting viable seed, ongoing efforts to collect seed from ACT populations is a priority. Survey for undiscovered populations of Small Purple Pea have previously occurred; continuing to undertake surveys to improve our understanding of the distribution of the species in the ACT is a priority. Other future monitoring and research projects should aim to improve knowledge of: → →the life history and ecology of the species, including its reproductive processes, plant and seed longevity and germination requirements → →how minimum winter temperatures affect the life history of the species → →how the frequency, seasonality and intensity of fire impacts the species and its habitat → →the genetic variation within and between Small Purple Pea populations and the genetic viability of the current seed bank → →how habitat fragmentation and reduced population size impacts genetic variability of the species → →the reliance on, and limitations of, appropriate pollinators → →the effect of future climate change scenarios on the frequency and severity of frost nights and the likely impact on flowering success.
PART B 167 → →the feasibility of translocating this species → →potential refugia sites for the Small Purple Pea under a changing climate → →suitable seed collection methods and methods for establishing new populations via translocation → →the links between the persistence and fluctuations in abundance of the species, and abiotic and biotic variables (including disturbance, predation, vegetation dominance and structure, and soil moisture, chemistry and temperatures). MANAGEMENT The Small Purple Pea persists as small, fragmented populations across the ACT that are at high risk of local extinction. Thus, the management priorities for the species is to maintain and enhance site condition and undertake translocation projects. Specifically, priority management actions include: → →continue annual monitoring of all known sites, including habitat condition assessments → →manage biomass through the use of fire, to maintain a heterogeneous habitat structure and diverse floristic composition → →control invasive plants that pose a threat to a population or site → →maintain an ex-situ population (seed bank and orchard) → →reduce the impacts of recreational activity, vehicle movement, trampling, soil disturbance and over grazing → →limiting information regarding the location of populations that is available to the public → →increase the size of existing populations and establish new populations through translocation. All translocation projects undertaken must be consistent with the principles outlined in the Conservator Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna in the ACT (ACT Government 2017) and the Guidelines for the Translocation of Threatened Plants in Australia (3rd Ed.) (Commander et al 2018). IMPLEMENTATION Implementation of this action plan requires: → →information identified in threatened species actions plans and other relevant documents to inform land planning and management on ACT Government Land → →allocation of adequate resources to undertake the actions specified in the strategy and action plans → →liaison with other jurisdictions (particularly NSW) with responsibility for the conservation of a threatened species or community → →collaboration with universities, CSIRO, ANBG and other research institutions to undertake research → →collaboration with non-government organisations such as Greening Australia to undertake on- ground actions → →collaboration with the community, where relevant, to assist with monitoring and other on- ground actions, and to help raise community awareness of conservation issues..
168 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS AND INDICATORS Table 1: Objectives, Actions and Indicators OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Protect all populations from unintended impacts (unintended impacts are those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process). 1a.  Apply formal measures to ensure all populations are protected from unintended impacts (including recreation, infrastructure works and other potentially damaging activities). 1b.  Encourage other jurisdictions to protect sites where the species occurs on their lands from unintended impacts All populations are protected from unintended impacts by appropriate formal measures. 1c.  Ensure protection measures require site management to conserve the species. Protection measures include requirement for conservation management. 1d.  Identify other sites where the species occurs by maintaining alertness to the possible presence of the species while conducting vegetation surveys in suitable habitat. Vegetation surveys in suitable habitat also aim to detect the species. MAINTAIN 2.  Manage the species and its habitat to maintain the potential for evolutionary development in the wild. 2a.  Monitor populations and the effects of management actions Trends in abundance are known. Management actions are recorded. 2b.  Manage to conserve the species and its habitat. Populations are stable or increasing. Habitat is managed appropriately (indicated by maintenance of an appropriate sward structure and herbage mass). Potential threats (e.g. weeds) are avoided or managed. 2c.  Maintain a database of sightings of the species, and if available, record habitat information. Records of sightings are maintained and used to determine the distribution of the species in the ACT. 3.  Reduce the impacts of genetic erosion on existing small populations 3a.  Undertake genetic rescue on targeted small populations using plants sourced from genetically diverse populations. Genetic rescue attempted at all small populations (<200 individuals)..
PART B 169 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR IMPROVE 4.  Enhance the long-term viability of populations through management of adjacent grassland/woodland to increase habitat area and connect populations. 4a.  Manage grassland/woodland adjacent to the species’ habitat to increase habitat area or habitat connectivity. Grassland/woodland adjacent to or linking habitat is managed to improve suitability for the species (indicated by an appropriate sward structure and plant species composition). 4b.  Undertake or facilitate research and trials into techniques for increasing the population size. Research trials have been undertaken to increase the size of the population. The population is stable or increasing. 5.  Expand the range of the species in the ACT by providing suitable habitat and establishing new populations by translocation (upon advice from feasibility studies). 5a.  Undertake or facilitate research and trials into establishing new populations. Research and trials have been undertaken to establish new populations. New population(s) established. 6.  Improved understanding of the species’ ecology, habitat and threats. 6a.  Undertake or facilitate research on habitat requirements, techniques to manage habitat, and aspects of ecology directly relevant to conservation of the species. Research undertaken and reported and where appropriate applied to the conservation management of the species and Hall Cemetery Management Plan. COLLABORATE 7.  Promote a greater awareness of, and strengthen stakeholder and community engagement in, the conservation of the species. 7a.  Undertake or facilitate stakeholder and community engagement and awareness activities. Engagement and awareness activities undertaken and reported..
170 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The illustration of the species was prepared for the ACT Government by John Pratt. REFERENCES ACT Government. 1998. Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta): An endangered species. Action Plan No. 9. Environment ACT, Canberra. ACT Government. 2015. Project Report: Swainsona recta – 2015 survey. Environment and Planning Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. ACT Government 2017. Conservator Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna in the ACT. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. Briggs, J.D. 1994. Research into the ecological/biological effects of fire on Swainsona recta. Survey of the Tralee- Williamsdale railway easement and the design and establishment of initial research plots, May 1994. Final report to Endangered Species Unit, Australian Nature Conservation Agency, Canberra. Briggs, J.D. and Leigh J.H. 1990. Delineation of important habitats of threatened plant species in south- eastern New South Wales. Research Report to the Australian Heritage Commission. CSIRO, Canberra. Briggs, J.D. and Mueller, W.J. 1997. Effects of fire and short term domestic stock grazing on the composition of a native secondary grassland bordering the Australian Capital Territory, August 1997. Report to Wildlife Research and Monitoring, Environment ACT, Canberra. Briggs, J.D. and Müller, W.J. 1999. Effects of fire and short-term domestic stock grazing on the endangered perennial forb, Swainsona recta, in a secondary grassland bordering the Australian Capital Territory, A Report to Environment ACT. Canberra, ACT. Buza, L., Young, A. and Thrall, P. 2000. Genetic erosion, inbreeding and reduced fitness in fragmented populations of the endangered tetraploid pea Swainsona recta. Biological Conservation, 93: 177-186. Commander, L.E., Coates, D.J., Broadhurst, L., Offord, C.A., Makinson, R.O. and Matthes, M. 2018. Guidelines for the Translocation of Threatened Plants in Australia. Third Edition. Australian Network for Plant Conservation, Canberra. Eco Logical Australia. 2017. M2G Biodiversity Offset Monitoring Report – Spring 2016. Prepared for Icon Water. Leigh, J.H. and Briggs, J.D. (eds.). 1992. Threatened Australian Plants: Overview and Case Studies. Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service: Canberra. NSW (OEH) Office of Environment and Heritage. 2012. National Recovery Plan for Small Purple-Pea (Swainsona recta). Hurstville, NSW. NSW (OEH) Office of Environment and Heritage. 2017. Small Purple-Pea – profile. Available at: http://www.environment. nsw.gov.au/threatenedSpeciesApp/profile.aspx?id=10782 Wilson, N., Seddon, J. and Baines, G. 2016. Factors influencing a population of the Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta). Technical Report 36. Environment and Planning Directorate, ACT Government, Canberra. Young, A. 2001. Issues and Options for Genetic Conservation of Small Populations of Threatened Plants in the ACT. Prepared for Environment ACT. CSIRO Plant Industry, Canberra..
PART B 171 SUPERB PARROT POLYTELIS SWAINSONII ACTION PLAN Male Superb Parrot at tree hollow (L Rayner).
172 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY PREAMBLE The Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) was declared a vulnerable species in the ACT on 19 May 1997 (Instrument No. DI1997-89 Nature Conservation Act 1980, Appendix A), and relisted in 2015 (Instrument No. NI2015-438 Nature Conservation Act 2014). Under section 101 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing a draft action plan for listed species. The first action plan for this species was prepared in 1999 (Action Plan No. 17; ACT Government 1999). This revised edition supersedes the earlier edition. Measures proposed in this action plan complement those proposed in the action plan for Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, the ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy, and for listed threatened woodland bird species such as the Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata), Brown Treecreeper (Climateris picumnus), Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta), Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia), Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolour), and Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang); available at available at the ACT Government’s Environment website. CONSERVATION STATUS The Superb Parrot is recognised as a threatened species in the following sources: → →National: Vulnerable – Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 → →Australian Capital Territory: Vulnerable – Section 91, Nature Conservation Act 2014 (June 2016) and Special Protection Status species – Section 109, Nature Conservation Act 2014 → →New South Wales: Vulnerable – Schedule 1, Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016 (December 2017) → →Victoria: Vulnerable – Section 91, Nature Conservation Act 2014 (June 2016) SPECIES DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY DESCRIPTION The Superb Parrot is a medium-sized, slender green parrot, weighing 133 to 157 g. Adult birds have a distinctively long, graduated tail, and pointed, backswept wings in flight. Adult males have brilliant bright green plumage with a bright yellow forehead and cheeks, and a red band across the lower throat. Adult females are green, with a pale green-blue face, red thighs, and rose- pink patches on the inner walls of the tail feathers. Both sexes have an orange iris and a coral-red bill. Immature birds resemble the adult female with a slightly darker iris. DISTRIBUTION Superb Parrots are endemic to inland south-eastern Australia. It occurs throughout the inland slopes and plains of New South Wales (NSW), including the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), and extends into northern Victoria (Barrett et al. 2003). The species is considered a vagrant in Queensland (Baker-Gabb 2011). The Superb Parrot breeding range is located west of the Great Dividing Range, mostly within the South Western Slopes (NSW) and Riverina (NSW and VIC) bioregions (Baker-Gabb 2011). On the South Western Slopes, its core breeding area is roughly bounded by Cowra and Yass in the east, and Grenfell, Cootamundra and Coolac in the west (OEH 2018). However, there are known.
PART B 173 outlying breeding areas further east in locations such as Gundaroo and Dalton. In the non-breeding autumn and winter months, birds are observed further north and west in the central and north western slopes and plains as far north as the upper Namoi and Gwydir Rivers, with a general absence of birds in their core breeding range. However, in the last five years, individual birds and small flocks have been recorded in most known core breeding locations during the non-breeding season. Breeding in NSW also occurs along the Murray, Edward and Murrumbidgee River corridors (OEH 2018) and this has been traditionally referred to as the “Riverina” population. This population is not known to move seasonally like the South Western Slopes population, although birds tend to spend the non-breeding season on the floodplain woodlands away from their River Red Gum forest breeding habitat. In Victoria, the species is largely confined to the Barmah Forest in the Riverina, with occasional sightings east along the Murray River. Superb Parrots are mainly present in the ACT region during their breeding season (September to January) and sparsely distributed throughout open Eucalypt woodland between Canberra, Yass, Sutton and Gundaroo (Davey 1997). Most Superb Parrot sightings from the ACT region have been in the northern districts of Belconnen and Gungahlin. Group sizes of 20 to 30 Superb Parrots can be observed in a single year at known breeding landscapes (C. Davey/L. Rayner pers. comm.). Figure 1 shows the distribution of Superb Parrot sightings in the ACT region from November 2004 to August 2015, based on observations reported to Canberra Nature Map. Since 2015, there have been an increasing number of Superb Parrot sightings over autumn and winter in the Territory (COG unpublished data), particularly in the southern suburbs of Kambah and Wanniassa (M. Mulvaney pers. comm.). In 2018, a flock of at least 20 birds was observed near the Erindale College sportsfields (D. Oliver pers. obs), and multiple groups of 4-10 birds were present in the central Molonglo Valley until late May (L. Rayner pers. obs.). High variability in observed Superb Parrot abundance, due primarily to movement, impedes reliable estimates of population size and growth (Manning et al. 2007). Best available recent estimates of Superb Parrot population change, based on survey data, suggest ongoing decline of the wild population across a substantial portion of their range (Ellis and Taylor 2014; Birdlife Australia 2015; A. Manning unpublished data; TSSC 2016; see Appendix B), but with an increasing number of Superb Parrot sightings in the ACT region (COG unpublished data). These regional trend patterns are consistent with bioclimatic modelling that projects a contraction and south-eastward shift of the species’ range in response to climate change (Manning et al. in review; see below). However, it was estimated that there were less than 5,000 wild Superb Parrot breeding pairs left in the 1990s (Higgins 1999), a population size of 6,500 mature individuals in 2000 (Garnett and Crowley 2000) and “well over 10,000” in 2010 (Garnett et al. 2011). Most recently, BirdLife International (2016) estimated a population size of up to 20,000 mature individuals. Agreement on population estimates is lacking among experts (TSSC 2016). HABITAT AND ECOLOGY Superb Parrots are an open woodland species relying on riverine forests in the Riverina, and Box-Gum woodlands in the tablelands and slopes (Webster 1988). Tree species associated with the Superb Parrot across its range include: River Red Gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis), Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi), Scribbly Gum (Eucalyptus rossii), Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora), Apple Box (Eucalyptus bridgesiana), Grey Box (Eucalyptus microcarpa), White Box (Eucalyptus albens), Red Box (Eucalyptus polyanthemos), Mugga Ironbark (Eucalyptus sideroxylon), Inland Red Box (Eucalyptus intertexta), Black Box (Eucalyptus largiflorens), and Callitris species (Baker- Gabb 2011; Rayner et al. 2015a). Superb Parrots are highly mobile, but its movement ecology is poorly understood.
 The Superb Parrot National Recovery Plan (Baker-Gabb 2011) states that “the Superb Parrot has been considered nomadic (Sharrock 1981), resident (Schrader 1980), dispersive (Webster 1988; Webster & Ahern 1992), migratory (Schrader 1980), or partly migratory (Higgins 1999)”. The direction, drivers and regularity of range-scale movements are unclear, though more recent research has revealed a strong link between seasonal movements and plant productivity (Manning et al. 2007) and, potentially, changes in food supply (Baker- Gabb 2011) and drought impacts (Higgins 1999)..
174 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Figure 1: Distribution of Superb Parrots in the ACT based on sightings over an 11-year period from November 2004 to August 2015. Group sizes show the number of Superb Parrot individuals seen for each sighting. Source: Canberra Nature Map. Most records displayed were contributed by the Canberra Ornithologists Group. Distribution of Superb Parrots in the ACT based on sightings over an 11-year period from November 2004 to August 2015. Group sizes show the number of Superb Parrot individuals seen for each sighting. Source: Canberra Nature Map. Most records displayed were contributed by the Canberra Ornithologists Group..
PART B 175 Superb Parrots will forage in Box-Gum woodland habitats or in artificial habitats in urban areas or on private land (e.g. crops; Webster 1988; Manning et al. 2004). When breeding, Superb Parrots typically forage within 9 km of nesting habitat (see below; Webster 1988; Manning et al. 2004; Rayner et al. 2015a). The condition and connectivity of Box-Gum woodland communities that provide foraging resources proximal to Superb Parrot breeding colonies may influence the species’ breeding success (Leslie 2005). In the ACT, Superb Parrot individuals will forage in urban-adjacent woodland patches (including critically endangered Yellow Box- Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland) and urban forest and greenspace, particularly in flowering Eucalypts and other trees directly adjacent to playing fields (M. Mulvaney unpublished data). Superb Parrots feed on the ground and in trees, on a variety of plant species. Their diet includes seeds of Wallaby-grass (Rytidosperma spp.), Barley-grass (Critesion spp.), Wheat (Triticum aestivum) and Oats (Avena sativa), numerous Wattles (e.g. Silver Wattle (Acacia dealbata), Deane’s Wattle (Acacia deanei), and Gold Dust Wattle (Acacia acinacea)), and Elms (Ulmus spp.). Superb Parrots feed on flowers, nectar and fruits of Eucalypts (e.g. Mugga Ironbark), Mistletoe (Amyema miquelii, Amyema quandang), Dwarf Cherry (Exocarpos strictus), and Plums (Prunus spp.). Lerps taken from Eucalypt foliage are another important component of the Superb Parrot diet (Baker-Gabb 2011). In the ACT, Superb Parrot foraging locations are positively associated with vegetation cover in the 3 to 20 m height range, and the presence of Eucalypts (Blakely’s Red Gum, Argyle Apple (Eucalyptus cinerea) and River Peppermint (Eucalyptus elata)), Wattles (Cootamundra Wattle (Acacia baileyana)), and Elms (English Elm (Ulmus procera) and Chinese Elm (Ulmus parvifolia)) (ACT Government unpublished data). Observations of Superb Parrot foraging are frequently reported in Yellow Box and Mugga Ironbark. Superb Parrots breed singly or in loose colonies, from September to December, typically near a watercourse (Webster 1988; Manning et al. 2004). In the ACT, core breeding locations are situated in open woodland in Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Nature Reserves (Davey 2010, 2012, 2013b; Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016) and in the central and lower Molonglo Valley (Davey 2013a). An obligate hollow nester, Superb Parrots rely on large, old and senescing Eucalyptus trees for breeding (Manning et al.2004). On the inland slopes, Superb Parrots show a strong reliance on Blakely’s Red Gum for nesting (Manning et al. 2006) and this tree species, along with Scribbly Gum, contribute the majority of known Superb Parrot nest trees in the ACT (Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016). Nest trees in the ACT are typically live individuals with an average trunk diameter of 110 cm (at breast height; Rayner et al. 2016), but Superb Parrots will also nest in large standing dead trees (Manning et al. 2004; Umwelt 2015). Superb Parrots favour nest hollows located in a trunk or primary limb, 5 to 35 m above ground (Webster & Ahern 1992; Manning et al. 2004; Umwelt 2015; Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016). Internal dimensions of Superb Parrot nest hollows vary across tree species. For example, in the ACT, nest hollows in Blakely’s Red Gum are typically deeper than in Scribbly Gum. Superb Parrot nest hollows are often re- used in successive breeding seasons, and not always by the same pair (L. Rayner pers. obs.). In the ACT, re-use rates are higher for nest trees (80%) than for nest hollows (40%). That is, Superb Parrots will preferentially use a different hollow in the same nest tree, when the original hollow is otherwise unavailable (Rayner et al. 2016). Superb Parrots lay 4–6 eggs that are incubated by the female for approximately 22 days before hatching (Higgins 1999; L. Rayner unpublished data).
 Nestlings are fed by both parents for approximately 40 days before fledging (Forshaw & Cooper 1981; L. Rayner unpublished data). It is estimated that Superb Parrots can live for 25 years or more (Baker-Gabb 2011). A generation time of 7.5 years is derived from an age at first breeding of 1 year and a maximum longevity in the wild of 14 years (TSSC 2016). PREVIOUS AND CURRENT MANAGEMENT The previous action plan for the Superb Parrot states that: “the focus of attention for habitat protection is in the northern part of the ACT near Hall, and at Mulligans Flat”. (ACT Government 1999). Indeed, areas of public land that provide significant breeding habitat for the species (i.e. multiple adult pairs breeding over multiple years) in the northern ACT have been removed from urban zoning and formally protected as part of Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve. In this landscape, ACT Government enforced a 100-m buffer between the urban boundary and any known nest tree, and restricted development works and vehicle access in the vicinity of nest sites during the breeding season..
176 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY The second, and equally important, breeding area for Superb Parrots in the ACT is in the Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland located in the central and lower Molonglo Valley (Davey 2013a). On 19 August 2008, the then Minister for Planning, Andrew Barr, removed the central Molonglo Valley area from ever being considered as a future urban area (ACT Legislative Assembly – Hansard). A Memorandum of Understanding between the ACT Government and landholders guides management of the central Molonglo Valley to protect and maintain the biodiversity values of the area, including Superb Parrot nest trees, in perpetuity while enabling other compatible land uses to occur. Superb Parrots occur in woodland and forest habitats with sparse tree cover and a grassy understorey. Historically, grassy woodland communities have been extensively cleared and severely modified throughout south-eastern Australia (Hobbs and Yates 2000). Habitat loss has been high in Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, which is listed as an endangered ecological community (nationally under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act 1999, and in the ACT under the Nature Conservation Act 2014) and supports Superb Parrot breeding habitat. Due to this association, previous and current practices to improve and maintain the extent and quality of grassy ecosystems in the ACT assist management objectives for conserving the Superb Parrot population. Such practices include: → →Retaining and protecting mature, hollow-bearing trees; → →Prohibiting illegal firewood and wildlife collection; → →Thinning or replanting endemic Eucalypts to promote appropriate woodland stand densities; → →Planting of endemic Eucalypts to promote landscape connectivity; and → →Managing grazing impacts through fencing and stock rotation. The protection and management of Superb Parrot breeding habitat is also strengthened by the listing of ‘The Loss of mature trees and a lack of recruitment’ as a Key Threatening Process under the Nature Conservation Act 2014 (accepted 27 September 2018). This listing is supported by Conservation Advice (ACT Government 2018) that explicitly recognises time lags in tree hollow development and the role of dieback in accelerating mortality of trees suitable for hollow-nesting fauna. THREATS Due to the migratory habit of Superb Parrots, threats beyond the Territory are likely to be impacting on birds that breed, and were bred, in the ACT. The ACT Government is therefore committed to supporting research and recovery actions implemented elsewhere in the species’ range, where practicable. Within the ACT, three key threats to maintaining a viable, stable and breeding population of Superb Parrots have been identified. These threats are: (1) habitat loss; (2) climate change and (3) nest competition. HABITAT LOSS Superb Parrots have lost significant areas of breeding and foraging habitat due to widespread destruction and degradation of Box-dominated woodlands throughout its range in south-eastern Australia (Hobbs and Yates 2000). Consequently, Superb Parrots have undergone a substantial historical range contraction, particularly evident in Victoria (Baker-Gabb 2011). The species currently occupies only a fraction of its former range (BirdLife International 2016), primarily in the NSW South Western Slopes bioregion (Manning et al. 2007), where over 92% of temperate woodland has been cleared (TSSC 2006). Remaining suitable Superb Parrot habitat in NSW is largely confined to roadside vegetation and small, fragmented patches of woodland on travelling stock routes and private land (Baker-Gabb 2011), which continue to be degraded by illegal clearing and habitat simplification (e.g. firewood collection, Driscoll et al. 2000). In contrast, the ACT contains some of the largest and most intact patches of lowland temperate woodland; a high proportion of which is formally protected (ACT Government 2004). However, simulation models undertaken by Manning et al. (2013) indicate that large hollow-bearing trees will continue to be lost from temperate woodland landscapes in lieu of strategic action to reduce tree mortality and increase tree recruitment. For example, in the South Western Slopes, the number of potential Superb Parrot nest trees is predicted to decline by 38% from current densities by 2050 (Manning et al. 2013)..
PART B 177 Tree mortality within the Superb Parrot range can be exacerbated by human-induced habitat degradation caused by illegal firewood harvesting, artificially high water levels due to irrigation, inappropriate fire regimes, and overgrazing by stock, rabbits and native herbivores (Baker-Gabb 2011; Webster & Ahern 1992). Further, Eucalypt dieback, which is characteristic among Superb Parrot nest trees (Manning et al. 2004) and significantly worse in Blakely’s Red Gum (Lynch et al. 2017), may accelerate nest tree mortality in the ACT region. The loss of hollow-bearing trees poses a particular challenge to Superb Parrot conservation in the ACT because: (1) it is estimated that suitable Superb Parrot nest hollows take more than 120 years to form (Manning et al. 2004); (2) Superb Parrots show a strong preference for breeding in nest trees previously occupied by Superb Parrots (Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016), such that the loss of known nest trees may have a disproportionate negative impact on the local population; (3) Superb Parrots experience intense competition for nesting hollows, particularly from resident parrot species (Rayner et al. 2016) but also exotic species (see below); and (4) to date, attempts to supplement nest site availability with artificial structures (e.g. nest boxes) has shown little benefit to Superb Parrots (e.g. Lindenmayer et al. 2017). CLIMATE CHANGE A recent study by Manning et al. (in review) suggests that Superb Parrots are highly sensitive to climate change. Their analysis, using BIOCLIM models (e.g. Xu and Hutchinson 2013), projected the total bioclimatic range of the Superb Parrot will decrease by approximately 47% by 2050, and by 75% by 2070 as a result of climate change. Similar predictions have been made for Superb Parrots by the Central West Local Land Services, which are supported by detailed climate change model projections for the Central West region (Rawson 2016); a critical region for species migration, particularly from north to south and from low to high elevation. Along with these further range contractions, it is predicted that the core range of the Superb Parrot will shift south-eastward concentrating the population over the ACT and areas to the immediate north. Such predictions are supported by regional population trends estimated for the species (Appendix B), which show significant declines in the north-west of the range (Ellis and Taylor 2014), stable or weak declining trends toward the current core range (Birdlife International 2015; A. Manning unpublished data) and an increased number of sightings in the ACT region (COG unpublished data). The high mobility of Superb Parrots is likely to assist the species in finding viable habitat in future climates. However, supporting necessary movement through dispersal pathways and habitat continuity, and protecting and creating habitat that supports all stages of the species’ life cycle, will be critical. Importantly, the condition of woodland habitats is likely to influence future colonisation dynamics for the Superb Parrot. For example, a recent study by Tulloch et al. (2016) found that Superb Parrots have a higher probability of colonising new habitats where grazing intensity is reduced. Climate modelling indicates that conditions suitable for Blakely’s Red Gum will persist across its entire range in the ACT for the mid to long term (Mackenzie et al. 2018). Indirect influences of climate change, such as more intense insect-related defoliation, may increase levels of dieback in Blakely’s Red Gum (Lynch et al. 2017). A decline in this critical nesting resource could threaten Superb Parrot population recovery by reducing landscape-scale hollow availability and increasing competitive pressure for suitable breeding sites in novel nest tree species. NEST COMPETITION Inter-specific competition is a documented threat to the Superb Parrot population (Baker-Gabb 2011). Superb Parrots are an obligate hollow-nesting species and, as such, concern about the impacts of nest site competition is highest where there is a lack, or perceived shortage, of potential nest sites (Webster 1988). While ongoing loss of hollow-bearing trees is widely accepted to be an unsustainable threat to the Superb Parrot population, there is debate over whether (and, if so, where) suitable nest hollow availability is a factor limiting population growth (Davey and Purchase 2004; Manning et al. 2013; BirdLife International 2016). Superb Parrots in the ACT show a preference for tree hollows with an average entrance diameter of 12-13 cm (Umwelt 2015; Rayner et al. 2016), and an average chamber depth exceeding 70 cm (Rayner et al. 2016). The prevalence, abundance and distribution of such hollows, among tree species and across known breeding landscapes, has not been measured or estimated. Such information is critical to understanding and forecasting.
178 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY resource limitation for Superb Parrots. Further, the dynamics of hollow access and exclusion in diverse woodland faunal communities are difficult to measure and have not been studied in detail. Where aggressive, competitive interactions do not result in the obtainment or usurpation of a Superb Parrot nesting site, indirect effects of competitor visitation and harassment on individual fitness and provision rates remain plausible (L. Rayner pers. comm.). Given such knowledge gaps, understanding the effects of nest competition on Superb Parrots is currently limited to data on the presence and abundance of known and potential competitors. Potential nest site competitors include the Crimson Rosella (Platycercus elegans), Common Starling (Sturnus vulgaris), Sulphur-crested Cockatoo (Cacatua galerita), Eastern Rosella (Platycercus eximius), Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis), Galah (Eolophus roseicapilla), Little Corella (Cacatua sanguinea) and Long-billed Corella (Cacatua tenuirostris) (Webster 1988; Baker-Gabb 2011; Rayner et al. 2015a). In the ACT, concern has been raised about the impact of the exotic Common Myna (Pell and Tidemann 1997; Davey 2013b), but clear evidence of disruption to Superb Parrot nesting success from this species is lacking. Rayner et al. (2015, 2016) identify the native Crimson Rosella and the exotic Common Starling as the dominant competitors for Superb Parrot nesting sites in the ACT. There are also anecdotal reports of feral honey bees (Apis mellifera) occupying potential Superb Parrot nest sites, although their significance and level of impact is not known (Baker- Gabb 2011). In the ACT, nest site competition in Superb Parrot breeding landscapes is high (Davey et al. 2013b; Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016) and likely to increase given projected increases in the regional population due to climate change (Manning et al. in review). The potential impacts of current and future urban developments in Canberra on urban and woodland bird communities, and specifically the abundance of hollow-dependent birds, is likely to influence competition for nesting sites in the ACT (Rayner et al. 2015b). ADDITIONAL THREATS Other threats to Superb Parrots that are poorly understood or prevalent outside of the species’ range, and therefore not a focus of this action plan, include: Urban impacts – Superb Parrots commonly breed in peri-urban woodland, and research into the disruption to Superb Parrot breeding activity from existing suburbs and new developments is in its infancy. Preliminary results from the ACT indicate that Superb Parrots require a distance of at least 200 m to buffer the impacts of urban development on nest selection (ACT Government unpublished data). Negative urban impacts can include: construction disturbance, altered competitor and predator exposure, noise and light pollution, increased human activity, and/or loss of habitat connectivity. Urban impacts may be direct or indirect and may increase with proximity to the urban boundary (e.g. Rayner et al. 2015b). The prevalence of drone use in urban areas is increasing; the impact of this on Superb Parrot flight space is unknown. Vehicle strike: Superb Parrots are highly susceptible to death by vehicle strike, particularly in rural areas where large flocks can be killed while feeding at the roadside on spilt grain (Rees 2016). Predation: Predation of Superb Parrot nests is low in the ACT (Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016). However, predation of adult Superb Parrots by feral cats, dogs and foxes, particularly while individuals forage on the ground, has not been studied. Poisoning: Poisons used for pest control, and pesticides used for crop management, have been identified as potential threats to Superb Parrot breeding success (Baker-Gabb 2011). Illegal trade: It is believed that many thousands of wild Superb Parrots have illegally entered the aviculture trade (Baker-Gabb 2011), but the level of ongoing threat from such activities is unclear. Psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD): Superb Parrots are susceptible to PBFD, but incidence and transfer of this fatal disease among Superb Parrot individuals is poorly understood..
PART B 179 MAJOR CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES The overall objective of this plan is to maintain a wild, self-sustaining population of Superb Parrots across its natural geographic range in the ACT. This includes the conservation of natural evolutionary processes. Specific objectives of the action plan are to: → →Conserve the ACT population of Superb Parrots by protecting landscapes that support confirmed breeding colonies. → →Enhance long-term viability of Superb Parrot populations through management of open woodland to increase breeding and foraging habitat area. → →Enhance long-term viability of Superb Parrot populations through management of urban landscapes to aid connectivity and promote foraging habitat. → →Improve understanding of Superb Parrot ecology, including habitat selection, resource requirements and emerging threats. → →Promote greater awareness of, and strengthen stakeholder and community engagement in, the conservation of Superb Parrots. CONSERVATION ISSUES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS PROTECTION Superb Parrots are a highly mobile species that moves through much of northern ACT during the breeding season. During this time it nests in open woodland habitats and forages in small woodland patches and urban greenspace. This pattern of habitat use also has become increasingly common in southern Canberra. As such, Superb Parrots occur on land under a range of tenures. A major focus of Superb Parrot protection measures in this action plan are on critical breeding habitat as indicated by the presence of: (i) a known nest tree, or (ii) a confirmed breeding colony. Here, we define a breeding colony as the aggregation of at least four adult Superb Parrot pairs that attempt to nest, in the same year, within an 80-ha area, where the maximum distance between these nesting attempts is 1 km. This definition is supported by Superb Parrot breeding research undertaken in the ACT (Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016) and may not be a suitable definition for areas beyond the ACT or under future climates. Where a new superb parrot breeding colony is located in the ACT, further survey work will be required to determine the extent of nesting effort in the supporting landscape (as per Superb Parrot survey guidelines, see Table 1 - Action 1d). Once all nesting events are located, the area requiring formal protection will be the minimum convex polygon area (IUCN 2015) containing those nesting events, with an additional 200 m conservation buffer applied to the polygon perimeter. This is an evidence-based buffer distance, with results of ACT Superb Parrot research indicating that the distribution of breeding Superb Parrots in woodland is impacted within 200 m of disturbance. As such, this action plan seeks to protect critical breeding habitat from direct and indirect threats..
180 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Bioclimatic projections indicate that additional areas of the ACT may become suitable for breeding Superb Parrots in the future, particularly in the south of the Territory. Similarly, with an increasing number of birds over-wintering in the ACT in recent years, the protection of emerging wintering grounds may be required. For the purpose of this action plan, wintering grounds are defined as locations in the ACT where repeat sightings of Superb Parrots, within or between years, occur from 1 June to 31 August. ACT Government will explore options for the protection of new and future Superb Parrot habitat on Territory land, as such information becomes available (see below). ACT Government also will seek to apply formal protections to known Superb Parrot movement pathways on Territory land, which can include the nomination of trees identified as important movement ‘stepping stones’ to the ACT Tree Register, established under the Tree Protection Act 2005 (https://www.legislation.act.gov. au/a/2005-51/default.asp). The ACT Government also will cooperate with surrounding shires in NSW to protect and enhance regional habitat and movement corridors for the species. ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSET REQUIREMENTS Environmental offset requirements for species and ecological communities in the ACT are outlined in the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy 2015. The ACT Government has committed to assess and offset impacts to Superb Parrots from the Throsby and Molonglo Valley residential developments. These commitments form part of the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment and Molonglo Strategic Assessment offset packages approved by the Commonwealth Government under the EPBC Act 1999. Avoidance, mitigation and offset measures detailed in the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Biodiversity Plan 2013 and Molonglo Valley Plan for the Protection of Matters of National Environmental Significance 2011 meet requirements for the protection of matters of national environmental significance under the EPBC Act. As a condition of these plans, the ACT Government is required to manage Superb Parrots to ensure long-term persistence of breeding individuals in northern ACT. These plans, and supporting documents, are publicly available on the ACT Environmental Offsets Register. The Molonglo Valley plan does not specify conservation actions and outcomes for Superb Parrots but acknowledges benefit to Superb Parrots through the protection and conservation of Box-Gum woodland within the Molonglo Valley strategic assessment area. However, a targeted survey was undertaken as part of the Molonglo Adaptive Management Strategy 2013 to establish the baseline distribution, abundance and breeding status of Superb Parrots within the Molonglo Valley strategic assessment area. Conservation outcomes planned for Superb Parrots in the Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Biodiversity Plan 2013, to be achieved through direct and indirect offsets, include: → →Long-term persistence of a breeding Superb Parrot population in northern ACT; → →Improved management of potential Superb Parrot habitat to support population recovery; → →Improved understanding of Superb Parrot habitat requirements for foraging and dispersing within peri- urban and urban environments; → →Improved understanding of Superb Parrot breeding ecology in the northern ACT in terms of site fidelity and nest success; and → →Improved Superb Parrot habitat connectivity through strategic planting in the northern ACT. The Superb Parrot Habitat Improvement Plan 2015 and Extension to the Mulligans Flat and Goorooyarroo Nature Reserves Offset Management Plan 2015 were developed to guide the implementation of ecological management activities and support progress toward the above conservation outcomes within the offset areas. Environmental offset research commitments have advanced ecological knowledge of Superb Parrots in northern ACT and, in turn, support the development of conservation priorities defined in this action plan. Annual reports (Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016) that summarise the findings of Superb Parrot offset research are publicly available on available at the ACT Government’s Environment website. There remain significant knowledge gaps about the ecology of Superb Parrots and further ecological research and monitoring of Superb Parrots is required to fulfil the ACT Government’s strategic assessment commitments (see below)..
PART B 181 MONITORING AND RESEARCH Superb Parrot distribution and abundance varies in response to seasonal conditions at the landscape scale (Manning et al. 2007). Therefore, long-term monitoring is essential to determine the population status of Superb Parrots in the ACT region and evaluate the success (or otherwise) of conservation measures implemented. The collection of baseline population data at key breeding locations is needed to: (i) determine Superb Parrot population size and growth; (ii) track population variability to derive robust population trend estimates that inform the species’ conservation status; and (iii) measure the potential direct and indirect impacts of human-related disturbance and climate change. Superb Parrot survey data has been collected in the ACT by Davey (2010, 2012, 2013a, 2013b), by the Canberra Ornithologists Group through the ACT Woodland Bird Monitoring Program and Garden Bird Survey, by the public through the online reporting tool Canberra Nature Map, and by the ACT Government (Umwelt 2015, SMEC 2017, Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016). Preliminary survey work by Davey (2010) aimed to identify ecological constraints to proposed urban development and resulted in improved understanding of the distribution and habitat preferences of Superb Parrots in the ACT, including the identification of active breeding colonies and core breeding areas (Davey 2010, 2013a). A monitoring and research project was initiated by the ACT Government in 2015 within the Mulligans Flat and Goorrooyarro Nature Reserves and within a rural lease in the lower Molonglo, as part of environmental offset area management under commonwealth approval conditions. The project is a collaboration between the Australian National University and the ACT Government, and involves surveys for breeding individuals, nest hollow surveillance and GPS tracking. The project aims to measure reproductive output and identify variables influencing nest success and movement of Superb Parrots in the ACT. In 2017, this project was expanded to include the central and lower Molonglo Valley breeding colony identified by Davey (2013a). This work involved developing and implementing a comprehensive monitoring strategy for Superb Parrots in the ACT, resulting in mapping of known Superb Parrot nest trees, and an improved understanding of breeding success, nest site selection and local foraging movements (Rayner et al. 2015a, 2016). In 2017, the ACT Government used tracking data from individual Superb Parrots tagged within Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve (Rayner et al. 2015a) to investigate foraging site selection within the ACT. Superb Parrot monitoring and research in the ACT will continue to focus primarily on reproductive participation and output in woodland habitats on reserve and rural land. Further monitoring and research is required to better understand Superb Parrot movement ecology and future habitat selection in response to climate change and habitat-related disturbance. Specific research priorities for the ACT are outlined in Table 1 (below). Key research objectives include: → →Monitor reproductive participation and output: in critical breeding habitat. → →Characterise breeding and foraging resources: that support reproductive success of the ACT population. → →Assess competition and predation at known nesting sites: to be achieved through remote camera data collection and nest survival analysis. → →Investigate efficacy of artificial breeding habitat: exploring whether designed artificial hollow structures (nest box, log hollow, artificial limb or created hollow chamber) can increase Superb Parrot recruitment. → →Monitor emerging occupancy: confirm new Superb Parrot habitat through field surveys in the breeding season, with focus on southern grassy woodland areas (e.g. Tuggeranong district). → →Update guidelines for surveying Superb Parrots: at different stages of the species’ life cycle, to deliver robust estimates of abundance, distribution and annual productivity. → →Identify future potential habitat: using a combination of monitoring surveys, ecological research, and predictive modelling to guide long-term protection of critical Superb Parrot habitat, with a focus on (1) open woodland located in the Molonglo Valley and Stromlo Districts, and (2) the distribution and abundance of mature native trees. Once identified, future habitats may require proactive management to maintain and improve habitat values for the Superb Parrot. → →Investigate movement ecology: advance cross- jurisdictional partnerships to develop tracking techniques, identify wintering habitats and advance knowledge of range-wide movements..
182 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY MANAGEMENT Due to the high mobility of Superb Parrots and the uncertainty associated with future habitat use, management actions will be focused on maintaining and enhancing habitat quality at known breeding and foraging locations (based on best available evidence) and preventing or minimising any adverse impacts on Superb Parrots from activities occurring in adjacent landscapes. Known breeding areas in the ACT are described in Davey (2010, 2012, 2013a, 2013b), Umwelt (2015), Rayner et al. (2015, 2016) and SMEC (2017), providing valuable ecological data for managing broad structural attributes of breeding habitat. Hotspots of foraging activity by breeding Superb Parrots have been identified by Rayner et al. (2015) and the ACT Government (unpublished data). This research showed that 68%, 28% and 4% of foraging stops occurred on urban, reserve and rural land respectively. Superb Parrot foraging on reserved land was contained almost exclusively to the Mulligan’s Flat-Goorooyarroo Extended Woodland Sanctuary, while foraging stops in urban environments were more widely distributed. The ACT Government will explore opportunities to develop conservation arrangements with managers of ACT urban forest and greenspace to protect foraging locations critical to Superb Parrots. Foraging locations within the ACT urban environment that require sensitive ecological management include, but are not limited to: → →Mullion Park and surrounds, Harrison → →Gungahlin Cemetery, Mitchell → →Bellenden Street, Crace → →Kaleen Playing Fields and North Oval, Kaleen → →Fern Hill Park. Australian Institute of Sport and surrounds, Bruce → →Billabong Park and Just Robert Hope Park, Watson → →John Knight memorial Park, Belconnen → →Spofforth Street Golf Course, Holt → →Parkland around Ginninderra Creek near MacGregor Oval, MacGregor → →Parkland between Ginninderra Drive and Goodwin Hill, MacGregor → →Charnwood Playing Fields and Boslem/Harte Park, Charnwood Maintaining the ecological integrity of ACT habitat that supports Superb Parrot breeding colonies is a priority and contributes to population recovery efforts undertaken throughout the species’ range. Key management actions for ensuring the persistence of Superb Parrots in the ACT include: → →Map and retain known nest trees: living and dead - that have been used by Superb Parrots in the last five years. Potential nest trees in future habitats should be protected against removal when relevant bioclimatic projections become available. → →Mitigate projected woodland tree loss: to be achieved through a combination of revegetation works and management of grazing pressure to support natural regeneration (where appropriate). → →Promote favourable vegetation structure: at breeding and foraging locations; includes the maintenance of suitable tree stand densities, ground layer diversity and strategic augmentation plantings (e.g. acacias near breeding sites). → →Promote urban foraging resources: includes liaison with Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate to update Municipal infrastructure Design Standards for urban landscape projects, with particular attention to suburbs within 9 km of known breeding colonies. → →Identify and retain vegetation that facilitates movement: particularly local movements between breeding and foraging locations. Seasonal migration pathways should be protected if/when tracking technology allows for such insight. In addition to these on-ground actions, the ecological management of woodland remnants and protection of scattered paddock trees on private land will be supported..
PART B 183 IMPLEMENTATION Implementation of conservation actions outlined in the ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy and action plan for Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland will be fundamental to making progress towards the objectives of this action plan. Further, implementation of this action plan will require: → →Land planning and land management areas of the ACT Government to consider the conservation of Superb Parrots and grassy woodland ecosystems; → →Allocation of adequate resources to undertake the actions specified in the ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy and Superb Parrot Action Plan; → →Liaison with other jurisdictions (particularly NSW), landholders (Commonwealth Government) and stakeholders (e.g. National Superb Parrot Recovery Team) with responsibility for the conservation of Superb Parrots and grassy woodland ecosystems; → →Collaboration with universities, CSIRO and other research institutions to facilitate and undertake necessary Superb Parrot research; → →Collaboration with non-government organisations (e.g. Canberra Ornithologists Group), citizen scientists and the wider community to assist with monitoring and on-ground actions, and to help raise awareness of Superb Parrot conservation and recovery issues. Implementation of this action plan will result in new knowledge about the habitat and ecology of Superb Parrots. This knowledge should inform the implementation and review of actions in this plan. Under s.108 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014 the Conservator of Flora and Fauna must report to the Minister about each action plan at least once every five years and make the report publicly accessible within 30 days. The Scientific Committee must review an action plan every 10 years, or at any other time at the Conservator’s request..
184 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS AND INDICATORS Table 1: Objectives, Actions and Indicators OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Conserve the ACT Superb Parrot population by protecting areas that support breeding birds and emerging wintering grounds. 1a.  Apply formal measures to protect critical breeding habitat of Superb Parrots on Territory land. Encourage formal protection of critical breeding habitat on Commonwealth land. All critical breeding habitat of the Superb Parrot is protected by appropriate formal measures. 1b.  Identify and apply formal protection measures to trees on Territory land that support Superb Parrot movement. All trees identified as ‘stepping stones’ are nominated for protection via the ACT Tree Register. 1c.  Track the conservation status of Superb Parrots by monitoring abundance in areas that support confirmed breeding colonies and, where appropriate, at emerging ACT wintering grounds. Superb Parrot abundance is stable or increasing (accounting for temporal population variability and/ or future range shift). 1d.  Review and update monitoring and survey guidelines for Superb Parrots. New guidelines for surveying Superb Parrots are produced. MAINTAIN & IMPROVE 2.  Enhance long-term viability of Superb Parrot populations through management of open woodland to increase breeding and foraging habitat area. 2a.  Manage woodland habitat to ensure persistence of Superb Parrot breeding and foraging resources. All Superb Parrot nest and forage trees in open woodland, with evidence of use in the last 5 years, are mapped and retained. 2b.  Undertake tree planting to mitigate long-term habitat tree loss in the vicinity of known Superb Parrot breeding locations. Hollow producing Eucalypt species, such Blakely’s Red Gum, Scribbly Gum, River Red Gum and Red Box, are strategically planted within 100 ha of known Superb Parrot breeding locations. 2c.  Maintain suitable understorey structure and condition, particularly ground layer diversity, at known Superb Parrot foraging sites in open woodland. Understorey condition is maintained or improved at known Superb Parrot foraging sites in open woodland..
PART B 185 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR 3.  Enhance long-term viability of Superb Parrot populations through management of urban landscapes to aid connectivity and promote foraging habitat. 3a.  Provide advice to planners on plant species favoured by Superb Parrots for foraging in urban open space. Superb Parrot feed plant species are planted and promoted at known urban foraging locations. 3b.  Provide advice to planners on the location and species composition of Superb Parrot urban movement corridors. Suitability of known Superb Parrot urban movement corridors is maintained or improved. 4.  Improve understanding of Superb Parrot ecology, including habitat selection, resource requirements and emerging threats. 4a.  Support Superb Parrot research initiatives that: (i) identify and map critical habitat areas (i.e. breeding and foraging locations) and (ii) characterise critical habitat resources (e.g. tree hollows) Data on Superb Parrot nest tree locations, and nest hollow dimensions, are collected and mapped. 4b.  Support Superb Parrot research initiatives that: (i) evaluate competitive pressure of co- occurring hollow-using species; and (ii) measures prevalence and impacts of nest predation. Detailed long-term monitoring of Superb Parrot nest success is undertaken at one or more known breeding locations. 4c.  Support research that advances knowledge of Superb Parrot foraging ecology, including the identification of variables (e.g. plant species) that determine optimum foraging habitat. Data on Superb Parrot multi- strata foraging habitat selection and foraging behaviour are collected and analysed. 4d.  Support research that advances knowledge of Superb Parrot migration flightpaths, including the potential use of habitat corridors across jurisdictions. The efficacy of local- and range- scale satellite telemetry tracking methods is investigated and tested. 4e.  Support research that investigates the potential of hollow creation, manipulation and supplementation for improving nest success and breeding productivity of Superb Parrots. Hollow manipulation and supplementation trials are explored at one or more known breeding locations. 4f.  Support research that defines future potential Superb Parrot breeding and movement habitat in response to climate change. Future potential Superb Parrot habitat is identified and considered in conservation decision making..
186 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR COLLABORATE 5.  Promote greater awareness of, and strengthen stakeholder and community engagement in, the conservation of Superb Parrots. 5a.  Undertake or facilitate stakeholder and community engagement and awareness activities. Increased awareness and participation by the community to assist Superb Parrot recovery actions in the ACT. 5b.  Actively seek and facilitate citizen scientist involvement in research activities, where possible. Citizen science activities are actively supported. 5c.  Support cross-jurisdictional Superb Parrot conservation research and monitoring initiatives. Cross-jurisdictional engagement activities are undertaken. 5d.  Collaborate with Throsby residents to demonstrate and promote beneficial conservation actions that support Superb Parrot populations in adjacent woodland habitat. A conservation workshop is held with the residents of Throsby..
PART B 187 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This action plan was prepared by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government. Use of Superb Parrot data collected and summarised by Professor Adrian Manning (The Australian National University), Dr Damon Oliver (Office of Environment and Heritage) and the Canberra Ornithologists Group is gratefully acknowledged. COMMUNICATIONS Prof Adrian Manning, Fenner School of Environment and Society, Australian National University Dr Damon Oliver, Office of Environment and Heritage, NSW Government Dr Laura Rayner, Parks and Conservation Service, ACT Government Mr Chris Davey, Canberra Ornithologists Group member.
188 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY APPENDIX A NATURE CONSERVATION ACT (1980) CRITERIA SATISFIED 2.1  The species is known to occur in the ACT region and is already recognised as vulnerable in an authoritative international or national listing. 2.2  The species is observed, estimated, inferred or suspected to be at risk of premature extinction in the ACT region in the medium-term future, as demonstrated by: 2.2.1 Current serious decline in population or distribution from evidence based on: 2.2.1.1 Direct observation, including comparison of historical and current records; 2.2.1.3 Serious decline in quality or quantity of habitat; and 2.2.1.5 Serious threats from herbivores, predators, parasites, pathogens or competitors. 2.2.4  Seriously fragmented distribution for a species currently occurring over a moderately small range or having a moderately small area of occupancy within its range. 2.2.6 Small population. APPENDIX B POPULATION TREND ESTIMATES The following trend estimates have been derived for the Superb Parrot: → →The State of Australia’s Birds 2015 report (Birdlife Australia 2015) indicated a weak (non- significant) decline in Superb Parrot reporting rate between 1999 and 2013 for the South-east Mainland Region; → →Ellis and Taylor (2014) indicated a significant decline (50%) in Superb Parrot reporting rate between 2005 and 2013 in central western NSW; and → →An analysis by Manning et al. (unpublished data) indicated a significant decline (53%) in Superb Parrot reporting rate between 2001 and 2014 in the core breeding range..
PART B 189 REFERENCES ACT Government. (1999). Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii): A vulnerable species Action Plan No. 17. Environment ACT. Canberra. ACT Government. (2004). Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservaton Strategy Canberra. ACT Government. (2018). Nature conservation (loss of mature native trees) conservation advice 2018. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Baker-Gabb, D. (2011). National Recovery Plan for the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii. Melbourne. Barrett, G. (2003). The new atlas of Australian birds. Hawthorn East, Vic: Birds Australia. BirdLife Australia. (2015). State of Australia’s Birds 2015: Headline Trends for Terrestrial Birds, Regional Reports – South- eastern Mainland. BirdLife International. (2016). Polytelis swainsonii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2016. Committee, T. S. S. (2006). Advice to the Minister for the Environment and Heritage from the Threatened Species Scientific Committee on amendments to the list of ecological communities under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. Canberra. Davey, C. (1997). Observations on the Superb Parrot within the Canberra district. Canberra Bird Notes 22, 22(1), 1-14. Davey, C. (2010). The distribution, abundance and breeding status of the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii during the 2009-10 breeding season, Gungahlin, ACT. Canberra Bird Notes, 35(3), 205-221. Davey, C. (2012). Distribution, abundance and breeding status of the Superb Parrot during the 2010-11 breeding season, Gungahlin, ACT. Canberra Bird Notes, 36(3), 141-154. Davey, C. (2013a). Distribution, abundance and breeding status of the Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) during the 2011-12 breeding season, central and lower Molonglo Valley, ACT. Canberra Bird Notes, 38(2), 134-154. Davey, C. (2013b). Distribution, abundance and breeding status of the Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) during the 2012-13 breeding season, Throsby Neck, Throsby Ridge and East Throsby, ACT. Canberra Bird Notes, 38(3), 208-228. Davey, C., & Purchase, D. (2004). A survey of the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii and potential nesting tree hollows along roads of the South-western Slopes, NSW. Corella, 28, 1-3. Driscoll, D., Freudenberger, D., & Milkovits, G. (2000). Impact and use of firewood in Australia. Canberra: CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems. Ellis, M. V., & Taylor, J. E. (2014). After the 2010 rains: Changes in reporting rates of birds in remnant woodland vegetation in the central wheatbelt of New South Wales, Australia, from drought to post-drought. Australian Zoologist, 37(1), 29-39. Forshaw, J. M., & Cooper, W. T. (1981). Australian Parrots (Second (revised) edition ed.). Melbourne: Lansdowne Editions. Garnett, S. T., & Crowley. (2000). The Action Plan for Australian Birds. Canberra. Garnett, S. T., Szabo, J. K., & Dutson, G. (2011). The Action Plan for Australian Birds 2010. Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing. Higgins, P. (1999). Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic Birds (Vol. Volume 4). Melbourne: Oxford University Press. Hobbs, R. J., & Yates, C. J. (2000). Temperate eucalypt woodlands in Australia: Biology, conservation, management and restoration: Surrey Beatty & Sons Pty. Ltd. IUCN. (2015). Guidelines for the application of IUCN Red List of Ecosystems Categories and Criteria, Version 1.0. In L. M. Bland, D. A. Keith, N. J. Murray, & R. J. P (Eds.). Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. Leslie, D. (2005). Is the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii population in Cuba State Forest limited by hollow or food availability? Corella, 29, 77-87. Lindenmayer, D. B., Crane, M., Evans, M. C., Maron, M., Gibbons, P., Bekessy, S., & Blanchard, W. (2017). The anatomy of a failed offset. Biological Conservation, 210, 286-292. Lynch, A. J. J., Botha, J., Johnston, L., Peden, L., Seddon, J., & Corrigan, T. (2017). Managing a complex problem: Blakely’s Red Gum dieback in the ACT Paper presented at the Restore, Regenerate, Revegetate Conference, Armidale, NSW..
190 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Mackenzie, J., Baines, G., Johnston, L., & Seddon, J. (2019). Identifying biodiversity refugia under climate change in the ACT and region. Canberra: Conservation Research. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Manning, A., Lindenmayer, D., Barry, S., & Nix, H. (2006). Multi-scale site and landscape effects on the vulnerable superb parrot of south-eastern Australia during the breeding season. Landscape Ecology, 21(7), 1119-1133. Manning, A. D., Gibbons, P., Fischer, J., Oliver, D. L., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2013). Hollow futures? Tree decline, lag effects and hollow-dependent species. Animal Conservation, 16(4), 395-403. Manning, A. D., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Barry, S. C. (2004). The conservation implications of bird reproduction in the agricultural “matrix”: a case study of the vulnerable superb parrot of south-eastern Australia. Biological Conservation, 120(3), 363-374. Manning, A. D., Lindenmayer, D. B., Barry, S. C., & Nix, H. A. (2007). Large-Scale Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of the Vulnerable and Highly Mobile Superb Parrot. Journal of Biogeography, 34(2), 289-304. Manning, A. D., Rayner, L., Xu, T., & Hutchinson, M. (in review). Bioclimatic modelling of a threatened parrot indicates rapid contraction and altitudinal shift in range over next 35 years. NSW Government. (2018). Threatened Species Profile: Superb Parrot. Pell, A. S., & Tidemann, C. R. (1997). The Ecology of the Common Myna in urban nature reserves in the Australian Capital Territory. Emu - Austral Ornithology, 97(2), 141-149. Rawson, A. (2016). Climate Change in the Central West of NSW. Addendum to the Central West Local Land Services Regional Strategic Plan. Local Land Services - Central West. Rayner, L., Ikin, K., Evans, M. J., Gibbons, P., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Manning, A. D. (2015a). Avifauna and urban encroachment in time and space. Diversity and Distributions, 21(4), 428-440. Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R., & Manning, A. (2015b). Breeding ecology of the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra: Nest monitoring report 2015. Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R., & Manning, A. (2016). Breeding ecology of the Superb Parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra: Nest monitoring report 2016. [Press release] Rees, J. D. (2016). Observation of mass road-kill of Superb Parrots Polytelis swainsonii feeding on spilt grain. Corella, 40(4), 99-100. Schrader, N. W. (1980). A review of the distribution of the Superb Parrot in central New South Wales. Australian Birds, 14, 45-50. Sharrock, R. E. (1981). Birds of the city of Wagga Wagga, New South Wales. Australian Bird Watcher, 9, 110-123. SMEC. (2017). Superb Parrot Monitoring: Lands End, Belconnen. Report for the ACT Government Land Development Agency. Threatened Species Scientific Committee. (2016). Conservation advice to the Minister for the Environment and Heritage from the Threatened Species Scientific Committee on amendments to the listing of Polytelis swainsonii as a threatened species under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. Canberra. Tulloch, A. I. T., Mortelliti, A., Kay, G. M., Florance, D., & Lindenmayer, D. (2016). Using empirical models of species colonization under multiple threatening processes to identify complementary threat-mitigation strategies. Conservation Biology, 30(4), 867-882. Umwelt. (2015). Monitoring of the 2014 Superb Parrot breeding event, Australia Capital Territory, Throsby, Central Molonglo and Spring Valley Farm. Report for the ACT Government Land Development Agency. Webster, R. (1988). The Superb Parrot - A survey of the breeding distribution and habitat requirements. Report Series No. 12. Canberra: Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service. Webster, R., & Ahern, L. (1992). Management for conservation of the Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) in New South Wales and Victoria. Xu, T., & Hutchinson, M. F. (2013). New developments and applications in the ANUCLIM spatial climatic and bioclimatic modelling package. Environmental Modelling and Software, 40(C), 267-279..
PART B 191 TARENGO LEEK ORCHID PRASOPHYLLUM PETILUM ACTION PLAN.
192 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY PREAMBLE The Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum, D.L.Jones & R.J.Bates 1991) was declared an endangered species on 15 April 1996 (Instrument No. DI1996-29, Nature Conservation Act 1980). Under section 101 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing a draft Action Plan for listed species. The first Action Plan for this species was prepared in 1997 (ACT Government 1997). This revised edition supersedes the earlier edition. Measures proposed in this Action Plan complement those proposed in the Action Plans for Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland, Natural Temperate Grassland and component threatened species such as the Small Purple Pea. This draft action plan includes any relevant parts of the Draft ACT Native Woodland Conservation Strategy. CONSERVATION STATUS The Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum) is recognised as a threatened species in the following sources: → →National: Endangered - Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Commonwealth). → →Australian Capital Territory: Endangered - Nature Conservation Act 2014 and Special Protection Status Species - Nature Conservation Act 2014 → →New South Wales: Endangered – Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016. CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES The overall objective of this plan is to preserve the Tarengo Leek Orchid in perpetuity in the wild across its natural geographic range in the ACT. This includes the need to maintain natural evolutionary processes. Specific objectives of the action plan are to: → →Protect sites where the species is known to occur in the ACT from unintended impacts; including the implementation of suitable buffers around habitat to safeguard against any negative impacts from potential future re-zoning or development. → →Manage the species and its habitat to maintain the potential for evolutionary development in the wild. → →Improve the long-term viability of populations through management of adjacent woodland to increase habitat area and connect sub-populations. → →Expand the range of the Tarengo Leek Orchid in the ACT by providing suitable habitat and establishing new populations by translocation (upon advice from feasibility studies). → →Improve the understanding of the species’ ecology, habitat and threats. → →Strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of the species. SPECIES DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY DESCRIPTION The Tarengo Leek Orchid is a slender terrestrial orchid that grows to 30 cm, with its single cylindrical leaf reaching 25 cm (DECCW 2010). The flower spike emerges from October through to November and produces 5 to 18 flowers. After flowering, small obovoid seed capsules form. The leaves and flowers are both dull green with pink tinges on the flowers, making this a very inconspicuous plant when growing among tall grasses or in small numbers. DISTRIBUTION Known populations of the Tarengo Leek Orchid occur in grassy woodlands and grasslands of the southern tablelands and western slopes of NSW and the ACT. The largest known population is at the Tarengo Travelling Stock Reserve near Boorowa (NSW), where there is estimated to be up 100,000 plants some years. Other populations have been found as far north as Ilford.
PART B 193 Cemetery (Bathurst, NSW), to the south at Steve’s Travelling Stock Reserve (Delegate, NSW) and to the east at Captains Flat Cemetery (NSW) (DECCW 2010). These populations have relatively few individuals, but provide an insight into the extent of the population. Given the level of fragmentation and degradation across this region, it may be assumed that the Tarengo Leek Orchid was once more common and widespread than it is today. Within the ACT, the Tarengo Leek Orchid is only known to occur at the Hall Cemetery, where the species was first properly identified in 1991. The number of flowering plants at the Hall Cemetery has fluctuated from year to year, within the range of 0 to 96. However, between 20 and 60 flowering plants are usually counted each year. Statistical analysis of the population indicates that it increased until the early 2000s, from which point it has remained relatively stable (Wilson et al. 2016). The most up to date distribution data for this species is publicly available on the ACT Government’s mapping portal, ACTmapi. HABITAT AND ECOLOGY The Tarengo leek Orchid tends to grow among native – and to a lesser extent exotic – grasses on fertile soils of low relief. Species of the genus Prasophyllum are known to prefer moister soils in depressions and swamps (Jones 1988), a trend that appears to apply to the Tarengo Leek Orchid. The population at the Hall Cemetery occurs in a partially cleared area within a Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum grassy woodland. The site is typical of the Tarengo Leek Orchid habitat and is dominated by Kangaroo Grass (Themeda triandra) and Wallaby grasses (Rytidosperma spp.) with a high diversity of forbs. There are localised dominant patches of the exotic grasses Yorkshire Fog (Holcus lanatus) and Sweet Vernal-grass (Anthoxanthum ordoratum), which fluctuate annually. Given the small population size and relatively recent identification, the biology and ecology of the Tarengo Leek Orchid is poorly understood. For much of the warmer months, the plant persists as a tuber, before shooting in late autumn. The inflorescence develops folded in half inside the leaf before flowering in late spring. An individual flowering in consecutive years is uncommon, and may contribute to the fluctuations in the population (Wilson et al. 2016). When flowering has been observed more than once in an individual, the minimum interval between flowering is generally less than 5 years. However, periods of up to 16 years between flowering have been recorded at the Hall Cemetery. Comparable fluctuations between the Hall Cemetery and Tarengo Travelling Stock Reserve populations indicate that landscape scale factors – such as climate – may influence flowering. Minimum winter temperatures, particularly thenumber of nights at or below -4°C, are associated with lower numbers of recorded flowering plants at the Hall Cemetery (Wilson et al. 2016). This finding indicates that cold air and frost may damage the leaf and thus prevent flowering. The flowers of Prasophyllum species are pollinated by insects, particularly bees and wasps, that are attracted by the nectar and scents produced by the flower (Jones 1988). A generalist thynnine wasp has been observed as an important pollinator for the Tarengo Leek Orchid (DECCW 2010). Like most orchids, Prasophyllum species are generally outcrossers and although reproduction is mostly by seed, daughter tubers are also produced (Jones 1988). The conditions associated with viable seed production are not known and attempts to disperse seed at sites known to have once been occupied by the Tarengo Leek Orchid have been unsuccessful. Prasophyllum species require a fungal symbiont, however the species associated with the Tarengo Leek Orchid remains unknown (DECCW 2010). PREVIOUS AND CURRENT MANAGEMENT The only known population of the Tarengo Leek Orchid in the ACT occurs at the Hall Cemetery. The site was set aside in 1883, but was left untouched until 1907 when a small portion of the land was cleared, fenced off and the first burials took place (DECCW 2010). The site was managed by trustees until the mid- 1970s. During this time the grass was burnt on an almost annual basis, but grazing by livestock was rare, if not completely absent. After a change in management in 1976, the site was mown at least three times a year. In 1988, the cemetery became a public cemetery managed by the Canberra Public Cemeteries Trust with regular mowing occurring until 1994..
194 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Since the population at the Hall Cemetery was identified in 1991, there have been several instances where individuals have been dug up, or damaged by establishment of graves. In 1994 a mowing plan was established to avoid mowing plants while they are above ground. However, there have been further instances of plants being mown or damaged during or before flowering until around 2013. The Hall Cemetery Management Plan (Wildlife Research and Monitoring and Canberra Cemeteries 2005) provided recommendations on how to undertake common activities, while minimising damage to the Tarengo Leek Orchid population. This Plan was later updated in 2013 (Conservation Research and Canberra Cemeteries 2013). The Hall Cemetery remains an active site with several burials every year. There is a current proposal for additional burial portions within the existing cemetery block to accommodate burials for the next 20 – 25 years. The scope of the proposal includes the protection of the existing orchid population and habitat as well as ongoing restoration of the grassy Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum woodland. Neighbouring blocks (310 and 312) have been identified for future expansion of the cemetery. These blocks have a history of grazing and the Tarengo Leek Orchid is not known to occur there. The ‘Pf’ Public Land overlay of the cemetery block, which allows burials to occur, was expanded on 24/11/05 in the Territory Plan to include Blocks 310 and 312 (ACT Government 2005). Since 2008, Friends of Grasslands (FoG) – a volunteer organisation – in cooperation with Canberra Cemeteries and Conservation Research, has conducted removal of woody weeds, thistles and exotic grasses as well as the re-planting of under-storey species in the woodland area surrounding the cemetery. Up until 2013, this included the removal of eucalypt regeneration from within and around the Tarengo leek Orchid population as a means of preserving the open grassy habitat occupied by the species. As an adaptive management measure to ensure the ongoing persistence and health of the remnant woodland in the cemetery, this practice has been scaled back and individual saplings have been identified for protection from mowing with the implementation of the updated Hall Cemetery Management Plan in 2013 (Conservation Research and Canberra Cemeteries 2013). The recent findings by Wilson et al. (2016) of a negative relationship between flowering of the Tarengo Leek Orchid at the Hall Cemetery and the number of nights equal to or colder than -4⁰C also highlights the need to ensure the persistence of elevated vegetation as both a grassy sward and intact woodland in and around the Hall Cemetery. Maintaining vegetation structural complexity will help in avoiding frequent and severe frosts across the orchid habitat. THREATS The major threat to the Tarengo Leek Orchid in the ACT is its restricted range and population size. There is the potential for the ACT population to go extinct in a single event. Further, the isolation from other populations limits localised genetic diversity, leaving it vulnerable to environmental change and disease. Within the current management paradigm, fine-scale habitat loss is likely as new graves are established. However, some consideration is given to avoiding known Tarengo Leek Orchid habitat when planning the establishment of new graves. For many years a flock of Sulphur-Crested Cockatoos (Cacatua galerita) have repeatedly visited the Cemetery to feed during spring, primarily on the bulb of the weed species Onion Grass (Romulea rosea). They often cause damage to Tarengo Leek Orchid flowering stems and those of other native forb species (eg. Bulbine Lily) by biting through the stems. Areas of orchid habitat are also disturbed by the birds digging in their search for Onion Grass bulbs. The extent of disturbance varies annually. Such damage has the potential to reduce the production of viable seed, and could affect the recruitment of new individuals as well as reduce habitat condition. Competition from both native and exotic species is also considered to be a risk. Patches of the Hall Cemetery are dominated by exotic grasses that are feared to be overcrowding individual plants. Given that exotic grasses have been present throughout the monitoring period, they do not appear to present an imminent threat, but require close monitoring. There are also concerns that Kangaroo Grass may be encroaching and present a threat at the Tarengo TSR site (NSW OEH 2012). However, Kangaroo Grass is the dominant native grass species at the Hall Cemetery and is unlikely to be a threat..
PART B 195 CHANGING CLIMATE Climate is considered to influence flowering in the Tarengo Leek Orchid, with recent analysis indicating flowering is associated with minimum winter temperatures (Wilson et al. 2016). Consequently climate change may present a threat to the population of the Tarengo Leek Orchid if it were to result in an increased number of frost nights. To what extent climate change may influence the species remains unknown. CONSERVATION ISSUES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS PROTECTION A critical element in the conservation of the Tarengo Leek Orchid is the conservation of Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Natural Temperate Grassland. Both of these communities have been listed as endangered in the ACT, and have their own Action Plans and Strategies. The Hall Cemetery population occurs in partially modified Yellow Box Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland that has remained in relatively stable state for over a century. This land is primarily managed by the Canberra Public Cemeteries Trust, who has worked with ACT Government to maintain this population of the Tarengo Leek Orchid. ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSET REQUIREMENTS Environmental offset requirements for species and ecological communities in the ACT are outlined in the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy and associated documents such as the ACT Environmental Offsets Assessment Methodology and the Significant Species Database. In the Assessment Methodology and Database, some of the threatened species have special offset requirements to ensure appropriate protection. It has been determined that the Tarengo Leek Orchid is not able to withstand further loss in the ACT so offsets for this species are not appropriate. If threatened species numbers are observed to change dramatically (either increase or decrease), a review of the threshold for that particular species in the Assessment Methodology and Database would be undertaken. SURVEY, MONITORING AND RESEARCH Since the population at the Hall Cemetery was first identified, it has been monitored on an almost annual basis, resulting in a quality long term population dataset. Projects have also been conducted to determine the pattern and timing of the annual life stages of the species and to model the stability of the population and the influences of climatic variables on flowering within the Hall population. Conservation Research have partnered with the Australian National Botanic Gardens (ANBG) on numerous occasions to collect and bank the seed from various threatened plant species in the ACT. The Tarengo Leek Orchid has been part of a number of these projects. There is currently 0.3976 grams (equating to ~ 198, 203 seeds) of Tarengo Leek Orchid seed banked from the Tarengo TSR and Hall Cemetery populations. Owing to the small size of the Hall population and the difficulties faced in collecting seed from Prasophyllum species, there is an ongoing need to add to the seed collection from the Hall Cemetery population. Searches for potential undiscovered populations have been undertaken in the past, however these searches should continue in to the future. Continued development in spatial modelling and remote sensing will assist in guiding better informed searches for new populations. Future data collection will be complemented by recording additional observations about localised site conditions. Specifically, this should include measurement of surrounding vegetation structure and dominance, soil moisture and temperatures, as well as evidence of disturbance such as cockatoo diggings or mowing. Such additional information will assist in linking population fluctuations with potential causes. The conservation of the Tarengo Leek Orchid will also benefit from further research in to its biology, specifically its reproductive processes and fungal symbiotic.
196 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY relationships. These biological traits are likely to be limiting factors in expanding the population size and range of the Tarengo Leek Orchid. Research in these areas will also help to inform population viability analyses. Priority research areas include: → →Improving knowledge of life history and ecology, such as plant longevity, seed longevity and identification of the environmental germination niche of the Tarengo leek Orchid. → →Investigations of soil chemistry, moisture and mycorrhizal fungi associations. → →Quantification of habitat vegetation dominance and structure. → →Investigation of genetic variation within and between surviving Tarengo Leek Orchid populations, including research into the genetic viability of the current seed bank. → →Investigation of pollinator limitations, effects of habitat fragmentation and reduced population size on genetic variability. → →Improving knowledge of how microsite variations, minimum winter temperatures and soil moisture affect the Tarengo Leek Orchid. → →Investigations into the effect of potential future climate regimes on the frequency and severity of frost nights and subsequent effects on flowering success. → →Identification of potential refugia sites for the Tarengo Leek Orchid under a changing climate. → →Continuing refinement of suitable seed collection methods and identification of methods for establishing additional populations via translocation of greenhouse germinated plants in conjunction with ANBG, Greening Australia and other parties. MANAGEMENT The confined distribution and small population of the Tarengo Leek Orchid in the ACT places the species at high risk of local extinction. Thus, the management focus for the Tarengo Leek Orchid should be to maintain adequate site condition and reduce the risk of disturbance to the current population (Jones 1992). Canberra Public Cemeteries Trust are the primary managers of the species in the ACT, owing to their management of the Hall Cemetery. Conservation Research are also actively involved in overseeing the management of the species. Management of the Hall Cemetery is guided by the Hall Cemetery Management Plan (Conservation Research and Canberra Cemeteries 2013). The plan outlines the best course of action associated with the following issues: → →Mowing → →Weeds → →Eucalyptus regeneration → →Vehicle access → →Grave digging → →Fertiliser use → →Cockatoo disturbance → →Fire → →Grazing Priority management actions include: → →Manage biomass to maintain a heterogeneous habitat structure and diverse floristic composition while allowing for cemetery operations. → →Control weeds if they pose a threat to the population or the site. → →Manage eucalypt regeneration to ensure ongoing persistence of the existing open woodland community. → →Avoid incompatible activities such as grave digging or vehicle movement in habitat areas. → →Maintain a low public profile of the site. → →Limit visitor impacts by curbing access to orchid populations during flowering and seed set, and restricting the species approved for graveside plantings. → →Continue annual monitoring program. → →Maintain an ex-situ ‘insurance’ population (plants and/or seed bank) while there is a high risk of extant populations becoming extinct..
PART B 197 IMPLEMENTATION Implementation of this action plan and the ACT Woodland Conservation Strategy will require: → →Land planning and land management areas of the ACT Government to take into account the conservation of threatened species. → →Allocation of adequate resources to undertake the actions specified in the strategy and action plans. → →Liaison with other jurisdictions (particularly NSW) and other land managers (Canberra Public Cemeteries Trust) with responsibility for the conservation of a threatened species or community. → →Collaboration with universities, CSIRO, Australian National Botanic Gardens and other research institutions to facilitate and undertake required research. → →Collaboration with non-government organisations such as Friends of Grasslands and Greening Australia to undertake on-ground actions. → →Engagement with the community, where relevant, to assist with monitoring and other on-ground actions, and to help raise community awareness of conservation issues..
198 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS AND INDICATORS Table 1: Objectives, Actions and Indicators OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Protect all populations from unintended impacts (unintended impacts are those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process). 1a.  Apply formal measures to ensure all populations are protected from impacts of recreation, infrastructure works and other potentially damaging activities. 1b.  Encourage other jurisdictions to protect sites where the species occurs on their lands from unintended impacts. All populations are protected from unintended impacts by appropriate formal measures. 1c.  Ensure sites are protected from unintended impacts. All sites are protected by appropriate measures from unintended impacts. 1d.  Implement ample buffers around habitat to ensure no unintended impacts result from adjacent re- zoning or development actions. All sites protected from unintended impacts from re- zoning or development by sufficient buffer areas. 1e.  Ensure protection measures require site management to conserve the species. Protection measures include requirement for conservation management. 1f.  Identify other sites where the species occurs by maintaining alertness to the possible presence of the species while conducting vegetation surveys in suitable habitat. Vegetation surveys in suitable habitat also aim to detect the species. MAINTAIN 2. Manage the species and its habitat to maintain the potential for evolutionary development in the wild. 2a.  Monitor populations and the effects of management actions. Trends in abundance are known. Management actions are recorded and considered in analysis of monitoring data. 2b.  Manage to conserve the species and its habitat, including implementing advice under the Hall Cemetery Management Plan (Conservation Research and Canberra Cemeteries 2013). Populations are stable or increasing. Habitat is managed appropriately (indicated by maintenance of an appropriate sward structure and herbage mass). Potential threats (e.g. weeds) are avoided or managed..
PART B 199 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR 2c.  Maintain a database of sightings of the species, and if available, record habitat information. Records of sightings are maintained and used to determine the distribution of the species in the ACT. IMPROVE 3.  Enhance the long-term viability of populations through management of adjacent grassland/ woodland to increase habitat area and connect sub-populations. 3a.  Manage grassland/woodland adjacent to the species’ habitat to increase habitat area or habitat connectivity. Grassland/woodland adjacent to or linking habitat is managed to improve suitability for the species (indicated by an appropriate sward structure and plant species composition). 3b.  Undertake or facilitate research and trials into techniques for increasing the population size. Research trials have been undertaken to increase the size of the population. The population is stable or increasing. 4.  Expand the range of the species in the ACT by providing suitable habitat and establishing new populations by translocation (upon advice from feasibility studies). 4a.  Undertake or facilitate research and trials into establishing new populations. Research and trials have been undertaken to establish new populations. New population(s) established. 5.  Improved understanding of the species’ ecology, habitat and threats. 5a.  Undertake or facilitate research on habitat requirements, techniques to manage habitat, and aspects of ecology directly relevant to conservation of the species. Research undertaken and reported, and where appropriate, applied to the conservation management of the species and Hall Cemetery Management Plan. COLLABORATE 6.  Promote a greater awareness of, and strengthen stakeholder and community engagement in, the conservation of the species. 6a.  Undertake or facilitate stakeholder and community engagement and awareness activities. Engagement and awareness activities undertaken and reported..
200 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The illustration of the species was prepared for the ACT Government by John Pratt. REFERENCES ACT Government. (1997). A leek orchid (Prasophyllum petilum): An endangered species. Action Plan No. 4. Canberra. ACT Government. (1998). Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta): An endangered species. Action Plan No. 9. Canberra ACT Government. ACT Government. (2005). Hall Cemetery Management Plan. ACT Government. (2013a). Hall Cemetery Management Plan. Canberra. ACT Government. (2013b). Hall Cemetery management plan. Canberra: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. ACT Government. (2015). Project Report: Swainsona recta – 2015 survey. Canberra ACT Government. (2017). Conservator Guidelines for the Translocation of Native Flora and Fauna in the ACT. Canberra. Briggs, J. D. (1994). Research into the ecological/biological effects of fire on Swainsona recta. Survey of the Tralee- Williamsdale railway easement and the design and establishment of initial research plots, May 1994. Final report to Endangered Species Unit, Australian Nature Conservation Agency. Canberra. Briggs, J. D., & Leigh, J. H. (1990). Delineation of important habitats of threatened plant species in south- eastern New South Wales. Research Report to the Australian Heritage Commission. Canberra: CSIRO. Briggs, J. D., & Mueller, W. J. (1997). Effects of fire and short term domestic stock grazing on the composition of a native secondary grassland bordering the Australian Capital Territory, August 1997. Report to Wildlife Research and Monitoring, Environment ACT. Canberra. Briggs, J. D., & Müller, W. J. (1999). Effects of fire and short-term domestic stock grazing on the endangered perennial forb, Swainsona recta, in a secondary grassland bordering the Australian Capital Territory, A Report to Environment ACT. Canberra. Buza, L., Young, A., & Thrall, P. (2000). Genetic erosion, inbreeding and reduced fitness in fragmented populations of the endangered tetraploid pea Swainsona recta. Biological Conservation, 93(2), 177-186. Commander, L. E., Coates, D. J., Broadhurst, L., Offord, C. A., Makinson, R. O., & Matthes, M. (2018). Guidelines for the Translocation of Threatened Plants in Australia (Vol. Third Edition). Canberra: Australian Network for Plant Conservation. DECCW. (2010). National Recovery Plan for Prasophyllum petilum, Department of Environment and Climate Change and Water (NSW). Hurstville. Jones, D. L. (1988). Native Orchids of Australia. Sydney: Reed Books. Jones, S. (1992). Nature at the grave’s edge: Remnant native flora and fauna in the cemeteries of the Southern Tablelands of New South Wales. Report for the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service – Save the Bush programme. Canberra..
PART B 201 Leigh, J. H., & Briggs, J. D. (1992). Threatened Australian Plants: Overview and Case Studies. NSW Government. (2012a). National Recovery Plan for Small Purple-Pea (Swainsona recta). Hurstville, NSW. NSW Government. (2012b). Tarengo Leek Orchid - profile. . NSW Government. (2017). Small Purple-Pea – profile. Wilson, N., Seddon, J., & Baines, G. (2016a). Factors influencing a population of the Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta). Unpublished Report: Conservation Research. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Wilson, N., Seddon, J., & Baines, G. (2016b). Factors influencing the flowering of the Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum). Technical Report 36. Canberra. Young, A. (2001). Issues and Options for Genetic Conservation of Small Populations of Threatened Plants in the ACT. Prepared for Environment ACT. Canberra: CSIRO Plant Industry..
202 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY.
.
PART B 111 YELLOW BOX–BLAKELY’S RED GUM GRASSY WOODLAND ENDANGERED ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITY ACTION PLAN.
PART B 113 PREAMBLE Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland was declared an endangered ecological community on 19 May 1997 (Instrument No. DI1997-89 Nature Conservation Act 1980; Appendix A). Under section 101 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014, the Conservator of Flora and Fauna is responsible for preparing a draft action plan for listed ecological communities. The first action plan for this ecological community was prepared in 1999 (ACT Government 1999). This revised edition supersedes all previous editions. In this action plan, ‘Endangered YB-BRG Woodland’ refers specifically to remnants of the federally listed (EPBC Act 1999) Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland endangered ecological community. Reference to ‘YB-BRG Woodland’ encompasses areas of Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland that may not meet all criteria for listing as an endangered ecological community, but contain critical components of the community, thereby retaining biodiversity values worthy of management action. Measures proposed in this action plan complement those proposed in the action plans for Natural Temperate Grassland, and for component threatened species that occur in Box-Gum woodland: Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta), Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii), and Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum), available at the ACT Government’s Environment website. CONSERVATION STATUS Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland is declared a threatened ecological community according to the following legislation: → →National: Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Critically Endangered). → →Australian Capital Territory: Nature Conservation Act 2014 (Endangered). → →New South Wales: Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016 (Endangered). CONSERVATION OBJECTIVES The overarching goal of this action plan is to conserve Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (hereafter Endangered YB-BRG Woodland) in perpetuity as a viable ecological community across its geographic range in the ACT. This includes managing and restoring natural ecological and evolutionary processes within the community. Objectives of the action plan are to: 1. protect remaining areas of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from unintended impacts 2. maintain the ecological values of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland to promote ecosystem function and prevent biodiversity loss, including maintaining: 3. understorey structural and floristic diversity in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland 4. optimal habitat for threatened species, including keystone structures 5. improve the condition and ecological function of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland by undertaking restoration 6. improve understanding of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland ecology, restoration principles and best practice threat management 7. strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland..
114 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY COMMUNITY DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY DEFINITION AND DESCRIPTION The endangered YB-BRG Woodland community in the ACT meets the IUCN classification as an endangered ecological community and is a component of the federally listed, critically endangered White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is characterised by a discontinuous stratum of trees of medium height (10-35 m) with canopies that are separated and with 4-30% foliage cover. The community is dominated by Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (Eucalyptus blakelyi); Apple Box (Eucalyptus bridgesiana) and Candlebark (Eucalyptus rubida) are the most common co-dominant trees. Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is characterised by a species-rich understorey of native tussock grasses, herbs and scattered shrubs. Remnants of the community in good condition have a ground cover dominated (50% or more of the perennial species) by native grasses and forbs. The ground cover of remnants in lower condition may not be dominated by native species, yet retain a canopy of mature trees (20 or more per hectare on average) and/or support natural regeneration. Derived grasslands (also known as secondary grassland) are an expression of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland that develop when the tree canopy cover is removed (or suffers dieback), but a relatively diverse understorey remains intact. The size of YB-BRG Woodland remnant patches varies, but to be listed as part of the endangered ecological community a patch must be at least 0.1 ha. Endangered YB-BRG Woodland provides important habitat for a range of flora and fauna, including rare and threatened species (Table 1). Woodland areas that provide critical habitat for threatened species include: Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve (NR), Goorooyarroo NR, lower slopes of Mount Ainslie NR, Callum Brae NR, Kinlyside NR, Castle Hill, Tharwa, Upper Naas Valley, Newline Quarry, and Dunlop NR. Remnants of YB-BRG Woodland, including those in poorer condition, contain habitat attributes that support a diversity of fauna associated with, or dependant on, woodland ecosystems. Small patches are considered important if they retain a groundcover dominated by native species and a canopy dominated by Yellow Box or Blakely’s Red Gum, especially where mature trees are present. Maintaining and enhancing habitat features and keystone structures, including tree hollows, leaf litter, coarse woody debris, mistletoe, and bark complexity, contributes to the maintenance of biodiversity and on-going ecosystem function of YB-BRG Woodland in poorer condition. DISTRIBUTION In the ACT, Endangered YB-BRG Woodland occurs across several land tenures, including land managed by the ACT Government (e.g. reserves and urban open space), the Commonwealth Government, and private land holders (e.g. rural lease and agistment properties). The community persists on low-lying undulating plains in the north, and the rolling hills and valleys of the Naas Valley. Patches of YB-BRG Woodland persist at altitudes of 625 - 800 m above sea level and encompass two woodland communities described by Armstrong et al. (2013). These are: (1) Blakely’s Red Gum – Yellow Box ± White Box tall grassy woodland of the Upper South Western Slopes and western South Eastern Highlands bioregions, commonly occurring on flat, fertile soils; and (2) Yellow Box – Apple Box tall grassy woodland of the South Eastern Highlands bioregion, occurring on similar soil types as (1), but along steeper well-drained slopes. Aerial photography has been used to map vegetation communities in the ACT. A number of the characteristics required to determine if areas meet the definition of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community (see above) are not discernible using this method (e.g. ground cover composition). Therefore, Figure 1 illustrates the potential distribution of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT (21,974 ha). It incorporates woodland between 625 and 800 metres above sea level, with a canopy dominated by Yellow Box and/or Blakely’s Red Gum (and associated trees) and/or a groundcover dominated by native species. Field inspection is required to confirm the true distribution of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland within this range..
PART B 115 Figure 1: Potential distribution of the Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland Community.Potential distribution of the Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland Community..
116 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Table 1: Species associated with woodlands in the ACT that are listed as threatened under the EPBC Act 1999 and/or the Nature Conservation Act 2014, and their frequency of occurrence in potential Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland (EEC). SPECIES STATUS SIGHTINGS IN EEC (%) Tarengo Leek Orchid (Prasophyllum petilum) Endangered 100 Swift Parrot (Lathamus discolor) Vulnerable 43 Pink-tailed Worm-lizard (Aprasia parapulchella) Vulnerable 38 White-winged Triller (Lalage sueurii) Vulnerable 36 Varied Sittella (Daphoenositta chrysoptera) Vulnerable 35 Canberra Spider Orchid (Caladenia actensis) Endangered 32 Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia) Endangered 31 Hoary Sunray (Leucochrysum albicans var. tricolor) Endangered 27 Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris picumnus) Vulnerable 26 Painted Honeyeater (Grantiella picta) Vulnerable 25 Superb Parrot (Polytelis swainsonii) Vulnerable 23 Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata) Vulnerable 23 Scarlet Robin (Petroica boodang) Vulnerable 23 Small Purple Pea (Swainsona recta) Endangered 21 Glossy Black-Cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus lathami) Vulnerable 16 Golden Sun Moth (Synemon plana) Endangered 13 Perunga Grasshopper (Perunga ochracea) Vulnerable 12 Austral Toadflax (Thesium australe) Vulnerable 11 PREVIOUS AND CURRENT MANAGEMENT PROTECT NATURE RESERVES A core focus of previous management has been to ensure Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is protected in an adequate, representative, and comprehensive reserve network. The ACT contains some of the largest (> 100 ha) and best connected remnants of good quality box-gum grassy woodland in Australia (ACT Government 2004). The establishment of leasehold title and associated planning policies in the ACT discouraged the adoption of intense pasture improvement techniques that have contributed to YB-BRG Woodland degradation more broadly. Since the implementation of the ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy (ACT Government 2004), 1,156 hectares of lowland woodland have been formally protected. This includes woodland areas added to the reserve network and/or rezoned to Hills, Ridges or Buffers under the Territory Plan 2008 (Table 2). Objectives outlined in the Territory Plan 2008 for Hills, Ridges and Buffers seek to conserve environmental integrity, natural heritage resources, natural habitats, and wildlife corridors. The total area of lowland woodland managed for conservation in the ACT is 5,371 hectares. ENVIRONMENTAL OFFSETS Under the Environmental Protection Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act 1999, the ACT Government is committed to assess and offset direct impacts to Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from development. Commonwealth approval is required for any action that may significantly impact Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, or threatened species associated with YB-BRG Woodland. Environmental offset requirements for endangered ecological communities in the ACT are outlined in the ACT Environmental Offsets Policy 2015. Offset areas.
PART B 117 are managed for conservation, often for a net gain in biodiversity outcomes. Avoidance, mitigation, and offset measures detailed in offset packages approved by the Commonwealth Government meet requirements for the protection of Matters of National Environmental Significance (2013) under the EPBC Act 1999. Prior to 2012, assessment of ecological values impacted by development were largely undertaken on a site-by- site basis. However, since 2012, the ACT Government also undertakes strategic assessments to examine the ecological values of future development areas, and considers the cumulative environmental impacts of ongoing development in the areas. Strategic assessment areas where Endangered YB-BRG Woodland has been identified include Gungahlin, Molonglo Valley, West Belconnen, and Eastern Broadacre (ACT Environmental Offsets Register). Strategic assessments result in environmental protection across landscapes and contribute to sustainable development. The EPBC Offsets Policy 2012 and ACT Environmental Offsets Policy 2015 has resulted in reduced clearing and increased protection for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland due to offset requirements (Table 2). Many environmental offset sites are added to the ACT reserve network. Table 2: Patches of Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland that have received protection status in the ACT since implementation of the ACT Lowland Woodland Conservation Strategy. LOCATION MANAGEMENT Mount Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve Kenny Environmental Offset Molonglo Valley Strategic Assessment Environmental Offset Gungahlin Strategic Assessment Kinlyside Environmental Offset Throsby Environmental Offset Horsepark North Environmental Offset Jacka Environmental Offset Taylor Environmental Offset Kenny broadacre Environmental Offset Isaacs Ridge Environmental Offset The Pinnacle Environmental Offset Justice Robert Hope Park Environmental Offset Bonner Environmental Offset Williamsdale Environmental Offset MAINTAIN Maintaining the extent and condition of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland requires active monitoring and management of threatening processes. The ACT Government conducts monitoring of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland communities to track ecological condition and better understand threats and management outcomes. Monitoring occurs at 104 sites located in box-gum woodland across the ACT, of which 75 sites are located in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. Woodland monitoring focuses on trends in vegetation structure and floristic diversity to determine whether management actions are maintaining or enhancing ecological values. Management practices that aim to maintain woodland condition have focused on reducing intense grazing pressure, controlling invasive species, and maintaining habitat for threatened species. GRAZING PRESSURE The ACT Government invests significant resources into monitoring and managing the impacts of grazing (predominantly by Eastern Grey Kangaroo [Macropus giganteus] and European Rabbit [Oryctolagus cuniculus]) grazing on vegetation and wildlife in YB-BRG Woodland. Ecological field data on kangaroo densities, pasture growth, floristic diversity, and other habitat features are used to build predictive models of appropriate.
118 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY site-level kangaroo densities to maintain ecological values. Complementary research on faunal responses to kangaroo grazing indicates that a mosaic of grass structures is necessary to maintain native fauna diversity across landscapes (Howland et al. 2014, 2016). Kangaroo grazing pressure in YB-BRG Woodland is managed according to this aim; specific actions and policies are outlined in the ACT Kangaroo Management Plan 2010. Rabbit control measures can include harbour removal, warren ripping, fumigation and poison baits. Rabbit control is particularly important in areas targeted for revegetation with direct seeding and tube stock planting. INVASIVE SPECIES Invasive species management in the ACT is guided by the ACT Weeds Strategy 2009-2019 and the ACT Pest Animal Strategy 2012-2022. An important focus of management is the establishment of priorities for invasive species control to assist in the allocation of limited resources. In YB-BRG Woodland, priorities for managing invasive plants include controlling, and preventing the further spread of, highly invasive species such as Chilean Needlegrass (Nassella neesiana), Serrated Tussock (Nassella trichotoma), African Lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula), and St John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum). The ACT Government and ParkCare also undertake removal of woody weeds, including Cootamundra Wattle (Acacia baileyana), Blackberry (Rubus fruticosus aggregate), and Sweet Briar (Rosa rubiginosa). There has been an overall reduction of weeds in ACT woodland areas, due to targeted efforts within Canberra Nature Park. For example, in 2015-2016, targeted control resulted in a total of 3,600 ha of invasive plants being treated (predominantly African Lovegrass, Serrated Tussock, and St John’s Wort), and early invader work resulted in outbreaks of Fireweed (Senecio madagascariensis) and Mexican Feather Grass (Nassella tenuissima) being contained at urban locations adjacent to grassy woodland. Invasive animals prioritised for control in YB-BRG Woodland include European Red Foxes (Vulpes vulpes), and Feral Cats (Felis catus), which are major predators of wildlife occurring in this community. Some research and control measures are implemented by the ACT Government and community groups (e.g. Canberra Indian Myna Action Group) to better understand and limit the impact of exotic species that compete with native fauna for nesting hollows and roost sites, such as the Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis) (Grarock et al. 2012) and European Honey Bee (Apis mellifera). THREATENED SPECIES HABITAT Woodland-dependent threatened species and vulnerable fauna communities are monitored across a range of YB-BRG Woodland patches. For example, long-term monitoring programs for woodland birds, implemented by the Australian National University and Canberra Ornithologists Group, are active on Canberra Nature Parks and private land to determine the conservation status (including trends in abundance and distribution) of vulnerable avifauna. The ACT Government has also supported extensive ecological research into the habitat requirements of YB-BRG Woodland flora (Johnson et al. 2018) and fauna (e.g. Howland et al. 2014; Ikin et al. 2014; Le Roux et al. 2016), including threatened species (e.g. Rayner et al. 2016), to identify critical habitat resources. Details for monitoring actions undertaken for woodland- dependent threatened species are provided in the respective action plans. CLIMATE CHANGE The ACT Government has conducted an assessment of biodiversity refugia in the ACT region (MacKenzie et al. 2018) to identify locations where regional native plant species are likely to persist under future climate change. Species distribution models are based on climate scenarios proposed by the NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling (NARCliM) project. Results of the study provide guidance to practitioners on where to protect and manage YB-BRG Woodland and component species for their long-term persistence within the ACT..
PART B 119 IMPROVE Evidence-based ecological restoration has been a strong focus of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland management. Improvements to the extent, condition, and connectivity of YB-BRG Woodland have been delivered through The ACT Woodland Restoration Project and Biodiversity Fund Project, and Environmental Offset restoration operations (ongoing). These projects aim to improve woodland condition and connectivity using a whole-of-landscape approach. To contribute to the adaptive management of YB-BRG Woodland, the ACT Government has supported research on woodland restoration (e.g. Manning et al. 2011, Johnson et al. 2018), connectivity (e.g. Drielsma et al. 2007), and threat assessment (e.g. Cowood et al. 2018). In the ACT, restoration of YB-BRG Woodland has focussed primarily on revegetation, understorey rehabilitation, and structural enhancement. REVEGETATION Revegetation works in the ACT have been undertaken to address multiple YB-BRG Woodland conservation aims, including: increasing extent of the community, reversing tree loss, maintaining appropriate stand densities, enhancing landscape connectivity, promoting threatened species habitat, retaining genetic integrity, controlling soil erosion, and restoring plant diversity. Extensive revegetation has occurred over the past 5 years in Greater Goorooyaroo (in the ACT and NSW), Lower Cotter Catchment, the Murrumbidgee River Corridor, Pinnacle Nature Reserve, Justice Robert Hope Park and Mulligan’s Flat Nature Reserve. Future priority landscapes are in rural areas. UNDERSTOREY REHABILITATION Understorey plants play a critical role in maintaining and enhancing the ecological function of woodlands. The ACT Government has supported research trials of methods to restore the native herbaceous ground layer where plant diversity is highest (Zerger et al. 2011). The ACT Government also undertakes management activities such as weed removal, slashing (to reduce biomass of exotic dominants and reduce standing nitrogen), fire management, ecological scrapes (to remove nutrient-rich topsoil before reseeding), and direct seeding of native grasses and forbs. Research from Kama Nature Reserve has shown that native forb enhancement via direct seeding is a viable technique, provided that sufficient quantities of seed are used, excess litter is removed, soil fertility is low, and competition is reduced (Johnson et al. 2018). STRUCTURAL ENHANCEMENT Vast areas of woodland have been degraded through human activities such as tree removal and firewood collection. Such activities simplify community structure and can compromise ecological function. Logs and tree hollows are two key elements of ecosystem structure that are critical to the maintenance of biodiversity (Barton et al. 2011; Manning et al. 2013; Gibbons and Lindenmayer 2002). Research from the Mulligans Flat-Goorooyarroo Woodland Experiment has been instrumental in guiding the scale and placement of coarse woody debris for the enhancement of YB-BRG Woodland. Over 4,000 tonnes of coarse woody debris have been added to ACT woodland areas, primarily to improve reptile and invertebrate habitat. Similarly, to address the loss of habitat values associated with mature trees (including carved hollows and artificial bark), the addition of vertical structures enriched with fauna habitat is being trialled in the Molonglo Valley. Monitoring is underway to evaluate their effectiveness. COLLABORATE The ACT community plays a significant role in the protection and restoration of YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT. For over 30 years, community members have made significant contributions to woodland threat management (e.g. weed removal and grazing control), restoration actions (e.g. revegetation and erosion treatment), and biodiversity monitoring (e.g. Vegwatch and woodland birds). In particular, community groups such as Greening Australia, ParkCare, Friends of Grasslands, Canberra Ornithologists Group, and the Molonglo, Ginninderra and Southern ACT Catchment Groups, considerably extend the capacity for woodland management through public outreach and the coordination of volunteer effort. The ACT community also make major contributions towards woodland conservation through advocacy, education and communication. For example, the Conservation Council has established Bush on the Boundary groups that bring together government and non-government stakeholders with an interest in conserving the integrity of ecosystems located on the urban fringe. Important educational advances have also resulted from the establishment of the Southern Tablelands Ecosystems Park within the National Arboretum, and the Canberra Nature Map website, where.
120 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY the public can share knowledge of native flora and fauna occurring within YB-BRG Woodland. Positive outcomes for the protection and restoration of YB-BRG Woodland have and will continue to come from collaborative land management partnerships with traditional owners. For example, the Caring for Ngunnawal Pathways project, developed by the Molonglo Catchment Group (in partnership with Buru Ngunnawal Aboriginal Corporation, Thunderstone Aboriginal Cultural and Land Management Services, Friends of Grasslands, Save Stirling Park, Yarralumla Residents Association, and the ACT Government) facilitates Ngunnawal leadership in the environmental restoration of a culturally and ecologically important site at Yarralumla called Bullan Mura. Over 40% of ACT lowland woodland communities occur on rural land, making respectful and innovative collaboration with private landholders pivotal to achieving regional conservation goals. Rural landholders have collaborated with the ACT Government to implement a range of projects on their properties, including those that aim to achieve sustainable agriculture and woodland conservation outcomes. For example, in collaboration with 18 rural landholders and a number of community and volunteer groups, the Woodland Restoration and Biodiversity Fund Project enhanced woodland connectivity and condition across all land tenures. THREATS Nationally, the primary threats to temperate woodland ecosystems include clearing, grazing, weed invasion, salinity, nutrient enrichment, deteriorating soil condition, altered fire regimes, and the effects of fragmentation and climate change. In the ACT, the key threats to YB-BRG Woodland are urbanisation, inappropriate disturbance regimes, invasive plants, pest animals, eucalypt dieback, and climate change. URBANISATION In south-eastern Australia, grassy woodland ecosystems have been extensively and disproportionately cleared for agriculture and urban development, and what remains is highly modified and fragmented. In the ACT, ongoing loss and fragmentation of woodland vegetation is driven primarily by urbanisation. Most of the remaining Endangered YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT occurs in the northern half of the Territory (Figure 1) where low-lying, open country, close to existing human infrastructure, is favoured for ongoing urban development and expansion. While significant ecological value may be retained by small woodland patches (Fischer and Lindenmayer 2002; Eldridge and Wong 2005) and scattered or isolated remnant trees (Manning et al. 2006; Fischer et al. 2010; Le Roux et al. 2018), fragmentation may reduce structural connectivity and habitat condition that facilitates foraging and dispersal movements by species, and population gene flow (Doerr et al. 2014). In turn, this compromises the population viability of plants and animals (e.g. Amos et al. 2014). In addition, overall habitat loss may limit species persistence such that efforts to improve landscape connectivity for particular species or taxa could be ineffective (Mortelliti et al. 2010). The predicted impacts of climate change will further exacerbate the impacts of fragmentation on species because small and isolated populations will be less able to adapt to change, or to track critical habitat resources and locally favourable bioclimatic conditions (Doerr et al. 2014). Urbanisation also has the potential to degrade YB- BRG Woodland, and the effects of disturbance may be greatest proximal to urban areas. Urbanisation can reduce the condition of YB-BRG Woodland and disrupt ecological function through direct human disturbance (e.g. high visitation, track creation), habitat modification (e.g. firewood and rock removal), poaching (i.e. illegal plant and animal collection), nutrient enrichment (e.g. urban run-off), pollution (e.g. noise, light), biotic homogenisation (i.e. the loss of habitat specialists), altered fauna communities (including predator and competitor abundances), altered hydrology, and increased pest invasion (plants and animals) (Alberti 2005). Management of urban-related threats to YB-BRG Woodland condition and biodiversity require sensitive and strategic management, particularly in woodland remnants located on the urban fringe (Ikin et al. 2015)..
PART B 121 INAPPROPRIATE DISTURBANCE REGIMES OVERGRAZING Inappropriate grazing regimes – characterised by the frequency, timing, and intensity of grazing – can cause significant disruption to plant communities, fauna habitat, and ecosystem processes in grassy woodland communities (Eldridge et al. 2016). Regardless of the dominant herbivore (native species or livestock), heavy grazing regimes negatively impact groundlayer structure (e.g. litter removal and tussock loss; McIntyre et al. 2015), native plant richness (Dorrough et al. 2012), fauna and their habitat (Lindenmayer et al. 2018; Lindsay and Cunningham 2009), regeneration and recruitment potential (Sato et al. 2016), and soil condition (Close et al. 2008). Inappropriate grazing regimes can also exacerbate other woodland threats. For example, groundlayer disturbance and soil nutrient enrichment associated with livestock grazing can facilitate weed invasion and reduce overstorey tree health (Close et al. 2008; Pettit et al. 1995). Where grazing pressure is moderated, woodland condition can improve. Improvements include more abundant, diverse and healthy native plant flora, and improved ecosystem function through, for example, increased rates of litter decomposition (Lindsay and Cunningham 2009). However, the impacts of inappropriate grazing regimes and the outcomes of grazing control, are dependent on climate and other site-level factors (e.g. fertilisation history, exotic plant competition and microsite conditions). These factors must be considered and managed (where possible) to achieve positive conservation outcomes for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland (Dorrough et al. 2011, Driscoll 2017; Prober et al. 2011; Sato et al. in review; Yates et al. 2000). FIRE Fire regimes are characterised by the frequency, intensity and season of burning. Inappropriate fire regimes can cause significant disruption to plant communities, fauna habitat, and ecosystem processes in grassy woodland communities (Driscoll et al. 2010). The most immediate and visible threat to Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from inappropriate fire regimes occurs in the understorey. Excessively frequent fires simplify woodland ecosystems by reducing the density and viability of native plant communities, and destroying groundlayer habitat elements (e.g. fallen timber, leaf litter). If fire is too infrequent, the woodland understorey can become structurally dense (Close et al. 2011; Wilson et al. 2018) and floristically homogenous (Penman et al. 2011). In turn, this alters groundlayer microclimates and limits regeneration niches (Bailey et al. 2012). Severe fires can kill native vegetation, including overstorey trees. The loss of young trees and seedlings can stunt recruitment and bias the age structure of stands. The loss of mature trees can reduce the carbon- storage and water-production potential of the ecosystem (Keith et al. 2017), increase midstorey regeneration and fire fuel loads (Wilson et al. 2018), and decrease habitat availability and diversity (e.g. destroying tree hollows; Stojanovic et al. 2016). Further, inappropriate fire regimes may impact woodland condition indirectly through altered water- and nutrient-relations. For example, Close et al. (2011) suggest that water-use efficiency, foliar nutrients, and crown health of woodland eucalypts is influenced by fire-governed understorey conditions. Weather patterns, especially precipitation, will also influence the impacts of fire frequency and severity on woodland vegetation (Hill and French 2004). INVASIVE PLANTS Invasive plants that threaten the condition of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland include exotic grasses (e.g. Chilean Needlegrass, Serrated Tussock and African Lovegrass), exotic forbs (e.g. St John’s Wort and Paterson’s Curse [Echium plantagineum]), exotic shrubs (e.g. Blackberry), and native invasive scrub (‘woody weeds’, e.g. Cootamundra Wattle). Invasion is driven by resource availability and is commonly associated with disturbance. If invasive plants are left untreated, native plant communities can be transformed into exotic pastures that further fragment the ecological community. In turn, this can lead to significant biodiversity loss, particularly in the herbaceous ground layer where plant diversity is greatest (Zerger et al. 2011). Effective restoration of YB-BRG Woodland that achieves a species-rich native understorey is impeded by limited scientific understanding of the mechanisms that bolster a plant community’s resistance to weed encroachment (Prober and Wiehl 2011). Competitive exclusion by exotic species and by native swards can inhibit efforts to restore diverse native plant communities (Lindsay and Cunningham 2011). Hence, management of herbivore grazing and soil nutrient loads, and consideration of the disturbance history of a given site, is critical to providing native plant communities with a competitive advantage over exotic invaders (Prober and Wiehl 2011; Driscoll 2017)..
122 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY PEST ANIMALS Pest animals that occur in YB-BRG Woodland include over-abundant and introduced herbivores (e.g. Eastern Grey Kangaroo and European Rabbit), introduced predators (e.g. European Red Fox, Feral Cat), introduced habitat competitors (e.g. Common Myna, Common Starling [Sturnus vulgaris]) and native habitat competitors (e.g. Noisy Miner [Manorina melanocephala] and Rainbow Lorikeet [Trichoglossus moluccanus]). The impacts of pest animals on woodland communities have been widely documented, with the management of habitat structure a re-occurring theme in abatement (e.g. Allcock and Hik 2004; Stokes et al. 2004; Pickett et al. 2005; Maron 2007). Currently, there is limited understanding of the relationship between pest animal densities and their impacts on YB-BRG Woodland to inform targeted management action. DIEBACK Dieback of native eucalypts is widespread across south- eastern Australia; woodlands across the Tablelands of NSW and the ACT are severely affected (ACT Government 1999). Trees suffering from dieback typically have smaller, sparse crowns with a high proportion of dead branches and epicormic foliage (Lynch et al. 2017). This episodic, and typically dramatic, decline in crown health can lead to extensive tree mortality in woodland communities (e.g. Ross and Brack 2015). Dieback is generally attributed to over-abundant insect populations (e.g. psyllids [Glycaspis spp.]) and exotic plant pathogens (e.g. Phytophthora cinnamom) (Jurskis 2005; O’Gara et al. 2005). However, the cause and primary stressors of dieback are poorly understood and include multiple, interacting factors such as drought, human-related disturbance, altered fire regimes, loss of understorey vegetation, water-logged or nutrient- enriched soils, and depauperate insectivore/predator communities (Jurskis 2005; Wardell-Johnson and Lynch 2005; NSW TSSC 2008, ACT Legislative Assembly 2017). Dieback effects are particularly relevant to Endangered YB-BRG Woodland because Blakely’s Red Gum trees are disproportionately affected in the ACT region. Recent modelling indicates that the change in condition of Blakely’s Red Gum and YB-BRG Woodland in the ACT between 2004 and 2017 was influenced by a range of habitat (e.g. soil characteristics and water table height), climate (e.g. seasonal precipitation) and cohort (e.g. tree canopy density) variables (Cowood et al. 2018). The impacts of dieback will be exacerbated by more extreme weather events associated with climate change (Ross and Brack 2015). CLIMATE CHANGE Climate change has become a significant emerging challenge in the conservation and management of natural ecosystems and biodiversity (Williams et al. 2014). Predicted impacts of climate change in the ACT region include (but are not limited to) increased maximum temperatures, prolonged drought, reduced soil moisture, increased intensity of heavy rainfall events, and harsher fire-weather climate (Timbal et al. 2015). As a consequence, climate change is likely to alter the structure and floristic composition of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland and compromise the resilience of grassy woodland communities. Fragmented systems are the most susceptible to condition decline (Brouwers et al. 2013), and degraded systems are likely to be the least equipped to adapt (Prober et al. 2012a). Furthermore, it is likely that climate change effects will interact with, and potentially exacerbate, other threatening processes, such as fire and dieback. Actions to enhance the long-term ecological integrity of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland must involve protection of climate refugia, as well as the management and restoration of extant YB-BRG Woodland remnants to safeguard and prepare future potential colonisation sites. Ameliorating climate change driven biodiversity loss in YB-BRG Woodland is likely to require innovative solutions that may challenge traditional approaches to conservation management (e.g. assisted colonisation; McIntyre 2011), but are critical to achieving adaptive ecological management in what may soon be novel environments..
PART B 123 CONSERVATION ISSUES AND INTENDED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS PROTECT Patches of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland occurring in the ACT require formal protection to increase the extent, and improve the condition of the community. More degraded remnants of YB-BRG Woodland require formal protection if they support threatened species, or if they contribute to buffering, connecting or extending patches of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. Environmental assessments and other statutory processes are used to determine which areas are assigned formal protection. Unintended impacts (those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process) can reduce the extent, condition and function of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community. Therefore, a key objective is to protect all Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from unintended impacts, as well as those areas of YB-BRG Woodland that either contribute to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community or contain rare and / or threatened species. Mapping the condition of large patches of YB- BRG Woodland and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community (due either to their position in the landscape [e.g. elevation, ecological buffers], regional context [e.g. connectivity], ecological values [e.g. function and species diversity] or restoration potential [e.g. contributing to ecosystem recovery aims]), will assist in future reserve design and the prioritisation of woodland- based conservation action. MAINTAIN Conservation of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland requires the maintenance of ecological and evolutionary processes, and the persistence of biodiversity within the community. It has been suggested that the single most effective management action to protect woodland integrity is to moderate grazing pressure; in particular, to avoid overgrazing (e.g. Weinberg et al. 2011). Fire, applied at low intensity and within ecologically tolerable frequencies, will also contribute to meeting our conservation objectives in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. The primary management action, to implement appropriate grazing and fire management regimes, demands: → →regular engagement with Australian temperate grassy woodland grazing and fire research → →strategic operations planning coordinated across management teams (including kangaroo population management, livestock conservation grazing, fuel reduction and ecological burning) at local (patches and paddocks), landscape (reserves and farms) and regional (Territory wide) scales → →robust monitoring and evaluation of management actions to determine the outcomes of intervention against stated conservation goals, and to adaptively plan for successive management seasons → →collaboration with non-government stakeholders, in particular Traditional Custodians and rural landholders. Additionally, as the ACT climate changes, the application of grazing and fire in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland must continue to be informed by an evaluation of management interventions and ecological responses to support ongoing conservation decision-making (e.g. Driscoll et al. 2010; Werner 2012; Gibbons et al. 2018). Another core management objective in this action plan is to maintain understorey structural and floristic diversity in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. The greatest loss of biodiversity in woodland communities occurs through the degradation of understorey elements (Zerger et al. 2011). The ACT Government will take action to emphasise the importance of ground layer ecological management in conservation planning, and improve the effectiveness of understorey management operations..
124 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY The Woodland Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Plan (CEMP) will provide guidance on the development of target values for understorey condition as well as recommendations for appropriate management, and assist in determining if these understorey condition targets are being met and maintained. Actions outlined above will support the maintenance of threatened species habitat. However, to best serve the population recovery objectives of multiple threatened species, consideration must be given to specific resource requirements of threatened species. At some sites, it may be prudent to advance the persistence of one (or multiple) threatened species to the detriment of another; in such cases, management decisions should be made with consideration for the rarity, habitat specialisation, functional traits, mobility and adaptability of impacted species, as well as their local, regional, and national conservation status. Large, mature trees are keystone structures in woodland communities. They encourage movement of fauna, which facilitates pollination and seed dispersal (Doerr et al. 2014). They also provide a critical source of seed for recruitment (Vesk et al. 2008), provide abundant breeding, roosting and foraging habitat (Ikin et al. 2013; Le Roux et al. 2018), and enhance critical ecosystem functions (e.g. carbon-storage, water-production; Keith et al. 2017). The Loss of mature native trees (including hollow bearing trees) and a lack of recruitment is listed as a key threatening process under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Thus, a critical action for maintaining keystone structures in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is to retain mature trees and their habitat features, even where they may be isolated or occur on poorer quality woodland sites, and promote appropriate levels of overstorey development. IMPROVE RESTORATION High density regeneration or plantings can significantly reduce the growth rate and maturity of woodland trees, delaying the creation of large boughs, tree hollows and fallen timber by decades (Vesk et al. 2008; Killey et al. 2010). Thus, creating optimal stand densities and maintaining diverse age structure in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland overstorey vegetation is critical to sustaining woodland biodiversity and may require a combination of planting and thinning operations, as well as efforts to enhance germination and recruitment. Increased resilience of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community can also be achieved through strategic restoration projects that enhance ecosystem function. The ACT Government will develop spatially and temporally explicit revegetation goals to inform the management of offset areas and other restoration projects implemented by the ACT Government (e.g. the Protecting and Connecting Box-Gum Woodland project). The location and timing of revegetation in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland, and the purpose of restoration will be considered in the development of project specific revegetation guidelines (e.g. increasing habitat, improving connectivity, and / or restoring soil condition). Consideration will also be given to: (i) landscape context and landuse history of the location, including connectivity (ii) functional traits of planted species, (iii) timeline of successional plantings, and (iv) location of predicted climate refugia (MacKenzie et al. 2018). The ACT Government will aim to support revegetation works across mixed land tenures (Manning et al. 2010), particularly those that may enhance Endangered YB- BRG Woodland climate resilience (Prober et al. 2012b; Hancock et al. 2018). The capacity of natural regeneration to meet restoration objectives that would otherwise be addressed with revegetation should be explored concurrently. Natural regeneration is often cheaper than planting, and typically establishes healthy plants, well- adapted to site-specific conditions (Spooner et. al. 2002; Rawlings et al. 2010). RESEARCH There remain significant knowledge gaps about how best to manage grazing in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland; particularly, how to balance grazing pressure from native herbivores with controlled conservation grazing by livestock. Effective guidelines for achieving ecologically sensitive and adaptive grazing regimes that incorporate both native and introduced herbivores, would be advanced by a robust evaluation of the conservation outcomes of controlled grazing by different herbivore species. Evaluating the differences between native and ungulate grazing management outcomes will include ecological (e.g. soil compaction, nutrient enrichment), social (e.g. animal welfare, lethal control), and economic (e.g. fencing and infrastructure) considerations. Further, this evaluation would be supported by long-term monitoring to assess the spatial (e.g. herbivore-related distribution of grazing pressure) and temporal (e.g. natural versus controlled timing of grazing) outcome of experimental grazing regimes..
PART B 125 There is limited knowledge regarding the causes and stressors of dieback in YB-BRG Woodland. This lack of ecological and technical knowledge is recognised as a barrier to effective policy development to mitigate the impacts of dieback (O’Gara et al. 2005). The ACT Government has identified a number of issues that warrant future research, these include studying the interactions between dieback and; fire frequency, landuse, vegetation density, soil moisture and condition, insects and fungal pathogens. The ACT Government has embarked on provenance trials of seeds from Blakely’s Red Gum trees that appear to be more resilient to dieback in this region, and those that occur in warmer drier regions that represent the possible future climate of the ACT. However, there are many research questions that need to be addressed to inform the protection of remaining Endangered YB-BRG Woodland remnants from the effects of dieback. Therefore, this action plan seeks to ensure monitoring of dieback is undertaken and support is provided to projects that improve our understanding of the causes of dieback. The ACT Government will undertake monitoring and support research projects that improve our understanding of the impacts of climate change on the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. This includes spatial and ecological modelling of: (i) climate refugia of the community and component species; (ii) future potential colonisation sites; (iii) understorey responses to predicted climate impacts; and (iv) changes to woodland soil condition with drying conditions. Research and monitoring findings will inform the development of climate resilient revegetation principles, and guide future restoration field trials. Important progress is already underway through collaborative projects involving, for example, the Australian Government and CSIRO (Prober et al. 2014a, 2014b, 2015). The ACT Government will undertake monitoring and research to improve our understanding of how to successfully restore understorey elements of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. There is also a need to better understand how invasive plants impact efforts to maintain and improve Endangered YB-BRG Woodland condition, and the effectiveness of invasive plant control. This information will improve projects that aim to enhance YB-BRG Woodland condition and will inform the development of revegetation goals (see above). COLLABORATE Ongoing collaboration between the ACT Government and non-government groups (including community groups, conservation organisations, rural land holders, Traditional Custodians and research institutions) is critical to achieving effective conservation of YB-BRG Woodland. The ACT Government will continue to facilitate community participation in YB-BRG Woodland conservation. It will also continue to refine and develop new ways of collaborating with the community to ensure that YB-BRG Woodland remains a viable ecological community for future generations. This will be undertaken through, for example, providing volunteering opportunities through the Landcare Gateway and ACT Government’s ParkCare Hub. ParkCare programs such as Ranger Assist provide opportunities for the public to work directly with Park Rangers in land management roles and involves undertaking activities such as survey data collection, fencing, and digital mapping. Providing support to citizen science programs (such as Canberra Nature Map and other programs delivered by non- government agencies) is another excellent way the ACT Government can enhance community knowledge and participation in conservation. In collaboration with Greening Australia, Molonglo Catchment Group and rural landholders, the Act Government is implementing the Protecting and Connecting Box-Gum Woodland project. This project aims to enhance and connect Endangered YB- BRG Woodland, including improving conservation outcomes for woodland biodiversity on rural properties. Rural landholders will also collaborate with the ACT Government and CSIRO to host research into the genetic variation of traits that may give Blakely’s Red Gum resistance to dieback. The ACT Government is committed to working with Traditional Custodians to undertake management in YB-BRG woodlands. The Murumbung Rangers in the ACT Parks and Conservation Service and the Aboriginal ACT Natural Resource Management Facilitator will provide a key role in raising awareness, appreciation and application of traditional land management. Cultural burns, which employ both traditional and contemporary knowledge are often referred to as ‘cool burns’ and may be adopted to facilitate cultural renewal, safeguard culturally significant sits and reduce fuel load and risk of high intensity burns in woodlands..
126 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY As conservation opportunities and challenges evolve, the need to learn through collaborative research and adaptive management remains critical. Further, new knowledge must be disseminated to the ACT community so that shared protection and restoration priorities can be developed and implemented. The ACT Government will facilitate open and timely communication of YB-BRG Woodland research findings with the ACT community. This will involve sharing research findings, as well as undertaking targeted communications to community stakeholders with an interest in woodland conservation. Feedback from the community on research advances will be considered and, where possible, incorporated into future conservation planning for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS AND INDICATORS Table 1: Key objectives, actions and indicators to support the conservation of Endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland. OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR PROTECT 1.  Protect remaining areas of YB- BRG Woodland from unintended impacts (unintended impacts are those not already considered through an environmental assessment or other statutory process) 1a.  Protect all Endangered YB-BRG Woodland from unintended impacts All Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are protected from unintended impacts 1b.  Protect YB-BRG Woodlands that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB- BRG Woodland community and/or contain rare or threatened species from unintended impacts YB-BRG Woodland that contributes significantly to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community are protected from unintended impacts YB-BRG Woodland areas that support rare or threatened species are protected from unintended impacts 1c.  Map the condition of large patches of YB-BRG Woodland and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community Develop and make publicly available maps of large patches of YB-BRG Woodlands and those that make a significant contribution to the integrity of the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community MAINTAIN 2  Maintain the ecological values of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland to promote ecosystem function and prevent biodiversity loss, including maintaining: → →understorey structural and floristic diversity → →optimal habitat for threatened species, including keystone structures 2a.  Implement appropriate grazing and fire management regimes 2b.  Develop and implement the Woodland Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program Monitoring indicates understorey condition targets are consistently being met Monitoring indicates that habitat for threatened species is maintained within range of acceptable variability.
PART B 127 OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR 2c.  Retain mature trees by protecting them fire, urban and infrastructure development and applying lease conditions Where appropriate, healthy mature trees, and standing dead trees are retained in YB-BRG Woodland 2d.  Promote appropriate levels of overstorey development in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland Regeneration of overstorey species is occurring IMPROVE 3.  Improve the condition and ecological function of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland by undertaking restoration 3a.  Create optimal stand densities, and maintain diverse age structure in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland overstorey vegetation Endangered YB-BRG Woodland remnants are open (4-30% foliage cover), with a distribution of tree ages and sizes 3b.  Develop spatially and temporally explicit revegetation goals (for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland) for restoration projects 3c.  Undertake restoration projects in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland Restoration projects for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are implemented and informed by spatially and temporally explicit restoration goals Monitoring indicates restoration goals for Endangered YB-BRG Woodland are achieved 4.  Improve understanding of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland ecology, restoration principles and best practice threat management 4a.  Evaluate the conservation outcomes of controlled grazing by different herbivore species in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland 4b.  Continue to adapt guidelines for controlled grazing regimes in Endangered YB BRG Woodland Monitoring indicates conservation values are improving in Endangered YB BRG Woodland 4c.  Monitor dieback in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland and support research projects that improve our understanding of the causes of dieback Knowledge of dieback in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland is enhanced and informs woodland restoration projects 4d.  Undertake monitoring and support research projects that improve our understanding of the impacts of climate change on the Endangered YB-BRG Woodland community Monitoring and research on the impacts of climate change inform woodland restoration projects 4e.  Undertake monitoring and support research projects that improve our understanding of how to successfully restore Endangered YB-BRG understorey Monitoring and research on understorey restoration techniques inform woodland restoration projects.
128 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVE ACTION INDICATOR 4f.  Undertake monitoring and support research projects to improve our understanding of: → →the impact of invasive plants on the condition of Endangered YB-BRG → →the effectiveness of invasive plant control in maintaining / improving biodiversity values. Monitoring and research on invasive plants and their control informs the ongoing management woodlands and restoration projects COLLABORATE 5.  Strengthen stakeholder and community collaboration in the conservation of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland 5a. Work with Traditional Custodians to undertake management in YB- BRG woodlands Traditional Custodians have participated in activities to manage the conservation and cultural values of YB-BRG woodland Traditional Custodians are satisfied with their level of participation in conservation of YB-BRG Woodland 5b.  Facilitate community participation in YB-BRG Woodland conservation and raise community awareness 5c.  Continue to refine and develop new means of collaborating with the community in the conservation of Endangered YB BRG Woodland The ACT Government has implemented and/or provided support to citizen science and other community programs for the conservation of YB-BRG Woodland. The ACT Government has partnered with rural landholders to undertake research and/or management projects for the conservation of YB- BRG Woodland (including projects that consider both profitability and conservation outcomes). Community stakeholders are satisfied with their level of participation in conservation of YB-BRG Woodland 5d.  Facilitate open and timely communication of Endangered YB- BRG Woodland research findings with the ACT community Findings of woodland research are effectively communicated to the community.
PART B 129 IMPLEMENTATION Implementation of this action plan will result in new knowledge about the ecology of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland. This knowledge will recurrently inform conservation advice and the delivery of management actions in Endangered YB-BRG Woodland during the life of the plan. Critical to the effective conservation management of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland will be the timely review of monitoring data that captures ecological responses to proposed management interventions. Toward this aim, the ACT Government commits to the development of the Woodland Integrated Ecosystem Implementation Plan, and the Conservation Effectiveness Monitoring Program for Lowland Woodlands. These documents will facilitate adaptive management of Endangered YB-BRG Woodland to maximise conservation gains intended from measures proposed in this action plan. Further, implementation of this action plan will require: → →land planning and land management areas of the ACT Government to take into account the conservation of threatened species and communities → →allocation of adequate resources to undertake the actions specified in the strategy and action plans → →liaison with other jurisdictions (particularly NSW) and other landholders (Commonwealth Government) with responsibility for the conservation of the threatened community and component species → →collaboration with universities, CSIRO and other research institutions to facilitate and undertake required research → →collaboration with non-government organisations to undertake on-ground actions → →collaboration with the community, where relevant, to assist with monitoring and other on-ground actions, and to help raise community awareness of conservation issues. Under s.108 of the Nature Conservation Act 2014 the Conservator of Flora and Fauna must report to the Minister about each action plan at least once every five years and make the report publicly accessible within 30 days. The Scientific Committee must review an action plan every 10 years, or at any other time at the Conservator’s request..
130 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This action plan was prepared by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, ACT Government. APPENDIX A NATURE CONSERVATION ACT (1980) CRITERIA SATISFIED 3.2  The community is subject to current and continuing threats or other processes likely to lead to premature extinction as demonstrated by: 3.2.1 Severe decline in distribution. 3.2.2 Marked alteration of composition or structure. 3.2.3 Community is approaching non-sustainability. 3.2.4 Loss or decline of species that play a major role in community function. 3.2.5 Small distribution causing the community to be at risk of premature extinction. 3.2.6  Community processes being altered to the extent that interaction between the community components will be impeded..
PART B 131 REFERENCES ACT Government. (1999). Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland: An endangered ecological community. Action Plan No. 10. Canberra. ACT Government. (2004). Woodlands for Wildlife: ACT Lowland Woodland Conservaton Strategy Canberra. ACT Legislative Assembly. (2017). Standing committee on environment and transport and city services. Paper presented at the [Inquiry into referred 2016-17 Annual and Financial Reports: QoN No. 04], Canberra. Alberti, M. (2005). The Effects of Urban Patterns on Ecosystem Function. International Regional Science Review, 28(2), 168-192. Allcock, K., & Hik, D. (2004). Survival, growth, and escape from herbivory are determined by habitat and herbivore species for three Australian woodland plants. Oecologia, 138(2), 231-241. Amos, J. N., Harrisson, K. A., Radford, J. Q., White, M., Newell, G., Nally, R. M., Sunnucks, P., & Pavlova, A. (2014). Species- and sex-specific connectivity effects of habitat fragmentation in a suite of woodland birds. Ecology, 95(6), 1556-1568. Armstrong, R. C., Turner, K. D., McDougall, K. L., Rehwinkel, R., & Crooks, J. I. (2013). Plant communities of the upper Murrumbidgee Catchment in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. Cunninghamia, A Journal of Plant Ecology For Eastern Australia, 13(1), 125-266. Bailey, T. G., Davidson, N. J., & Close, D. C. (2012). Understanding the regeneration niche: Microsite attributes and recruitment of eucalypts in dry forests.(Report). Forest Ecology and Management, 269, 229. Barton, P. S., Manning, A. D., Gibb, H., Wood, J. T., Lindenmayer, D. B., & Cunningham, S. A. (2011). Experimental reduction of native vertebrate grazing and addition of logs benefit beetle diversity at multiple scales. Journal of Applied Ecology, 48(4), 943. Brouwers, N. C., Mercer, J., Lyons, T., Poot, P., Veneklaas, E., & Hardy, G. (2013). Climate and landscape drivers of tree decline in a Mediterranean ecoregion. Ecology and Evolution, 3(1), 67-79. Close, D. C., Davidson, N. J., & Swanborough, P. W. (2011). Fire history and understorey vegetation: water and nutrient relations of Eucalyptus gomphocephala and E. delegatensis overstorey trees. Forest Ecology and Management, 262(2), 208-214. Close, D. C., Davidson, N. J., & Watson, T. (2008). Health of remnant woodlands in fragments under distinct grazing regimes. Biological Conservation, 141(9), 2395-2402. Commonwealth Government. (2006). White Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodlands and Derived Native Grasslands listing advice and conservation advice. Cowood, A. L., Lynch, A. J. J., & Botha, J. (2018). Blakely’s Red Rum dieback in the ACT: report to the ACT Enviornment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Canberra: Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra. Doerr, E. D., Doerr, V. A., Davies, M. J., & McGinness, H. M. (2014). Does structural connectivity facilitate movement of native species in Australia’s fragmented landscapes?: a systematic review protocol. Environmental Evidence, 3(1), 9. Dorrough, J., McIntyre, S., Brown, G., Stol, J., Barrett, G., & Brown, A. (2012). Differential responses of plants, reptiles and birds to grazing management, fertilizer and tree clearing. Austral Ecology, 37(5), 569-582. Dorrough, J., McIntyre, S., & Scroggie, M. P. (2011). Individual plant species responses to phosphorus and livestock grazing. Australian Journal of Botany, 59(7), 669-680. Drielsma, M., Manion, G., & Ferrier, S. (2007). The spatial links tool: Automated mapping of habitat linkages in variegated landscapes. Ecological Modelling, 200(3), 403-411. Driscoll, D. A. (2017). Disturbance maintains native and exotic plant species richness in invaded grassy woodlands. Journal of Vegetation Science, 28(3), 573-584. Driscoll, D. A., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bennett, A. F., Bode, M., Bradstock, R. A., Cary, G. J., Clarke, M. F., Dexter, N., Fensham, R., Friend, G., Gill, M., James, S., Kay, G., Keith, D. A.
, Macgregor, C., Possingham, H. P., Russel-Smith, J., Salt, D., Watson, J. E. M., Williams, D., & York, A. (2010). Resolving conflicts in fire management using decision theory: asset- protection versus biodiversity conservation. Conservation Letters, 3(4), 215-223..
132 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Eldridge, D., & Wong, V. (2005). Clumped and isolated trees influence soil nutrient levels in an Australian temperate box woodland. Plant and Soil, 270(1), 331-342. Eldridge, D. J., Poore, A. G. B., Ruiz-Colmenero, M., Letnic, M., & Soliveres, S. (2016). Ecosystem structure, function, and composition in rangelands are negatively affected by livestock grazing. Ecological Applications, 26(4), 1273-1283. Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2002). Small patches can be valuable for biodiversity conservation: two case studies on birds in southeastern Australia. Biological Conservation, 106(1), 129-136. Fischer, J., Stott, J., & Law, B. S. (2010). The disproportionate value of scattered trees. Biological Conservation, 143(6), 1564-1567. Gibbons, P. (2002). Tree hollows and wildlife conservation in Australia. Melbourne: CSIRO Publishing. Gibbons, P., Gill, A. M., Shore, N., Moritz, M. A., Dovers, S., & Cary, G. J. (2018). Options for reducing house-losses during wildfires without clearing trees and shrubs. Landscape and Urban Planning, 174, 10-17. Grarock, K., Tidemann, C. R., Wood, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2012). Is it benign or is it a pariah? Empirical evidence for the impact of the Common Myna (Acridotheres tristis) on Australian Birds. PLoS ONE, 7(7). Hancock, N., Harris, R., Broadhurst, L., & Hughes, L. (2018). Climate-ready revegetation. A guide for natural resource managers. Version 2. Accessible from: http://anpc.asn.au/resources/climate_ready_revegetation: Macquarie University, Sydney. Hill, S. J., & French, K. (2004). Potential impacts of fire and grazing in an endangered ecological community: plant composition and shrub and eucalypt regeneration in Cumberland Plain Woodland. Australian Journal of Botany, 52(1), 23-29. Howland, B., Stojanovic, D., Gordon, I. J., Manning, A. D., Fletcher, D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2014). Eaten out of house and home: impacts of grazing on ground-dwelling reptiles in Australian grasslands and grassy woodlands. PLoS ONE, 9(12). Howland, B., Stojanovic, D., Gordon, I. J., Radford, J., Manning, A. D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Birds of a feather flock together: Using trait-groups to understand the effect of macropod grazing on birds in grassy habitats. Biological Conservation, 194, 89-99. Ikin, K., Barton, P., Knight, E., Lindenmayer, D., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. (2014). Bird community responses to the edge between suburbs and reserves. Oecologia, 174(2), 545-557. Ikin, K., Knight, E., Lindenmayer, D. B., Fischer, J., & Manning, A. D. (2013). The influence of native versus exotic streetscape vegetation on the spatial distribution of birds in suburbs and reserves. Diversity and Distributions, 19(3), 294-306. Ikin, K., Le Roux, D. S., Rayner, L., Villaseñor, N. R., Eyles, K., Gibbons, P., Manning, A. D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2015). Key lessons for achieving biodiversity-sensitive cities and towns. Ecological Management & Restoration, 16(3), 206-214. Johnson, D. P., Catford, J. A., Driscoll, D. A., & Gibbons, P. (2018). Seed addition and biomass removal key to restoring native forbs in degraded temperate grassland. Applied Vegetation Science, 21(2), 219-228. Jurskis, V. (2005). Eucalypt decline in Australia, and a general concept of tree decline and dieback. Forest Ecology and Management, 215(1), 1-20. Keith, H., Vardon, M., Stein, J. A., Stein, J. L., & Lindenmayer, D. (2017). Ecosystem accounts define explicit and spatial trade-offs for managing natural resources. Nature Conservation & Ecology, 1(11), 1683. Killey, P., McElhinny, C., Rayner, I., & Wood, J. (2010). Modelling fallen branch volumes in a temperate eucalypt woodland: implications for large senescent trees and benchmark loads of coarse woody debris.
 Austral Ecology, 35(8), 956-968. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Bistricer, G., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2016). Effects of entrance size, tree size and landscape context on nest box occupancy: Considerations for management and biodiversity offsets. Forest Ecology and Management, 366, 135-142. Le Roux, D. S., Ikin, K., Lindenmayer, D. B., Manning, A. D., & Gibbons, P. (2018). The value of scattered trees for wildlife: Contrasting effects of landscape context and tree size. Diversity and Distributions, 24(1), 69-81..
PART B 133 Lindenmayer, D. B., Blanchard, W., Crane, M., Michael, D., & Sato, C. (2018). Biodiversity benefits of vegetation restoration are undermined by livestock grazing. Restoration Ecology, 26(6). Lindsay, E. A., & Cunningham, S. A. (2009). Livestock grazing exclusion and microhabitat variation affect invertebrates and litter decomposition rates in woodland remnants. Forest Ecology and Management, 258(2), 178. Lindsay, E. A., & Cunningham, S. A. (2011). Native Grass Establishment in Grassy Woodlands with Nutrient Enriched Soil and Exotic Grass Invasion.(Report). Restoration Ecology, 19(101), 131. Lynch, A. J. J., Botha, J., Johnston, L., Peden, L., Seddon, J., & Corrigan, T. (2017). Managing a complex problem: Blakely’s Red Gum dieback in the ACT Paper presented at the Restore, Regenerate, Revegetate Conference, Armidale, NSW. Mackenzie, J., Baines, G., Johnston, L., & Seddon, J. (2019). Identifying biodiversity refugia under climate change in the ACT and region. Canberra: Conservation Research. Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. Manning, A. D., Cunningham, R. B., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2013). Bringing forward the benefits of coarse woody debris in ecosystem recovery under different levels of grazing and vegetation density. Biological Conservation, 157, 204-214. Manning, A. D., Fischer, J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2006). Scattered trees are keystone structures – implications for conservation. Biological Conservation, 132(3), 311-321. Manning, A. D., Shorthouse, D. J., Stein, J. L., & Stein, J. A. (2010). Ecological connectivity for climate change in the ACT and surrounding region. Technical Report 21. Canberra: The Australian National University. Manning, A. D., Wood, J. T., Cunningham, R. B., McIntyre, S., Shorthouse, D. J., Gordon, I. J., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2011). Integrating research and restoration: the establishment of a long-term woodland experiment in south-eastern Australia. Australian Zoologist, 35(3). Maron, M. (2007). Threshold effect of eucalypt density on an aggressive avian competitor. Biological Conservation, 136(1), 100-107. McIntyre, S. (2011). Ecological and anthropomorphic factors permitting low-risk assisted colonization in temperate grassy woodlands. Biological Conservation, 144(6), 1781-1789. McIntyre, S., Cunningham, R. B., Donnelly, C. F., & Manning, A. D. (2015). Restoration of eucalypt grassy woodland: effects of experimental interventions on ground-layer vegetation. Australian Journal of Botany, 62(7), 570-579. Mortelliti, A., Fagiani, S., Battisti, C., Capizzi, D., & Boitani, L. (2010). Independent effects of habitat loss, habitat fragmentation and structural connectivity on forest-dependent birds. Diversity and Distributions, 16(6), 941-951. NSW Government. (2008). Forest eucalypt dieback associated with over-abundant psyllids and Bell Miners - key threatening process listing. [NSW Scientific Committee - Final determination]. NSW. O’Gara, E., Howard, K., Wilson, B., & Hardy, G. E. S. J. (2005). Management of Phytophthora cinnamomi for Biodiversity Conservation in Australia: Part 1 – A Review of Current Management. Western Australia. Penman, T. D., Binns, D. L., Shiels, R. J., Allen, R. M., & Penman, S. H. (2011). Hidden effects of forest management practices: responses of a soil stored seed bank to logging and repeated prescribed fire. Austral Ecology, 36(5), 571- 580. Pettit, N. E., Froend, R. H., & Ladd, P. G. (1995). Grazing in remnant woodland vegetation: changes in species composition and life form groups. Journal of Vegetation Science, 6(1), 121-130. Pickett, K., Hik, D., Newsome, A., & Pech, R. (2005). The influence of predation risk on foraging behaviour of brushtail possums in Australian woodlands. Wildlife Research, 32(2), 121-130. Prober, S., Hilbert, D., Ferrier, S., Dunlop, M., & Gobbett, D. (2012a). Combining community-level spatial modelling and expert knowledge to inform climate adaptation in temperate grassy eucalypt woodlands and related grasslands. Biodiversity and Conservation, 21(7), 1627-1650. Prober, S., Stol, J.
, Piper, M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Cunningham, S. (2014a). Towards climate-resilient restoration in mesic eucalypt woodlands: characterizing topsoil biophysical condition in different degradation states. Plant and Soil, 383(1), 231-244..
134 ACT NATIVE WOODLAND CONSERVATION STRATEGY Prober, S., Thiele, K., Rundel, P., Yates, C., Berry, S., Byrne, M., Christidis, L., Gosper, C., Grierson, P., Lemson, K., Lyons, T., Macfarlane, C., O’Connor, M., Scott, J., Standish, R., Stock, W., Etten, E., Wardell-Johnson, G., & Watson, A. (2012b). Facilitating adaptation of biodiversity to climate change: a conceptual framework applied to the world’s largest Mediterranean-climate woodland. Climatic Change, 110(1), 227-248. Prober, S., & Wiehl, G. (2011). Resource heterogeneity and persistence of exotic annuals in long-ungrazed Mediterranean-climate woodlands. Biological Invasions, 13(9), 2009-2022. Prober, S. M., Ebyrne, M., Mclean, E., H, Steane, D., A, Potts, B., M, Vaillancourt, R., E, & Stock, W., D. (2015). Climate- adjusted provenancing: a strategy for climate-resilient ecological restoration. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 3. Prober, S. M., Standish, R. J., & Wiehl, G. (2011). After the fence: vegetation and topsoil condition in grazed, fenced and benchmark eucalypt woodlands of fragmented agricultural landscapes. Australian Journal of Botany, 59(4), 369-381. Prober, S. M., Stol, J., Piper, M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Cunningham, S. A. (2014b). Enhancing soil biophysical condition for climate-resilient restoration in mesic woodlands. Ecological Engineering, 71, 246-255. Rawlings, K., Freudenberger, D., & Carr, D. (2010). A guide to managing box gum grassy woodlands: Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and Arts. Rayner, L., Stojanovic, D., Heinsohn, R., & Manning, A. (2016). Technical Report. Breeding ecology of the superb parrot Polytelis swainsonii in northern Canberra. Nest Monitoring Report 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.environment. act.gov.au/cpr/conservation-research/report_series Ross, C., & Brack, C. (2015). Eucalyptus viminalis dieback in the Monaro region, NSW. Australian Forestry, 1-11. Sato, C. F., Florance, D., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2019). Drivers of temperate woodland condition through time in an agricultural landscape. Land Degradation & Development, 30(11), 1357-1367. Sato, C. F., Wood, J. T., Stein, J. A., Crane, M., Okada, S., Michael, D. R., Kay, G. M., Florance, D., Seddon, J., Gibbons, P., & Lindenmayer, D. B. (2016). Natural tree regeneration in agricultural landscapes: The implications of intensification. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 230, 98-104. Spooner, P., Lunt, I., & Robinson, W. (2002). Is fencing enough? The short-term effects of stock exclusion in remnant grassy woodlands in southern NSW. Ecological Management & Restoration, 3(2), 117-126. Stojanovic, D., Webb Nee Voogdt, J., Webb, M., Cook, H., & Heinsohn, R. (2016). Loss of habitat for a secondary cavity nesting bird after wildfire. Forest Ecology and Management, 360, 235-241. Stokes, V. L., Pech, R. P., Banks, P. B., & Arthur, A. D. (2004). Foraging behaviour and habitat use by Antechinus flavipes and Sminthopsis murina (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae) in response to predation risk in eucalypt woodland. Biological Conservation, 117(3), 331-342. Timbal, B., Abbs, D., Bhend, J., Chiew, F., Church, J., Ekström, M., Kirono, D., Lenton, A., Lucas, C., McInnes, K., Moise, A., Monselesan, D., Mpelasoka, F., Webb, L., & Whetton, P. (2015). Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions: Cluster Reports, (M. Ekström, P. Whetton, C. Gerbing, M. Grose, L. Webb, & J. Risbey Eds.). Australia: CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology.
 Vesk, P. A., Nolan, R., Thomson, J. R., Dorrough, J. W., & Nally, R. M. (2008). Time lags in provision of habitat resources through revegetation. Biological Conservation, 141(1), 174-186. Wardell-Johnson, G., & Lynch, A. J. J. (2005). Landscape processes and eucalypt dieback associated with bell miner habitat in south-eastern Australia. Australian Forestry, 68(4), 242-250. Weinberg, A., Gibbons, P., Briggs, S. V., & Bonser, S. P. (2011). The extent and pattern of Eucalyptus regeneration in an agricultural landscape. Biological Conservation, 144(1), 227-233. Werner, P. A. (2012). Growth of juvenile and sapling trees differs with both fire season and understorey type: Trade-offs and transitions out of the fire trap in an Australian savanna. Austral Ecology, 37(6), 644-657. Williams, K. J., Prober, S. M., Harwood, T. D., Doerr, V. A. J., Jeanneret, T., Manion, G., & Ferrier, S. (2014). Implications of climate change for biodiversity: a community-level modelling approach. Canberra. Wilson, N., Cary, G. J., & Gibbons, P. (2018). Relationships between mature trees and fire fuel hazard in Australian forest. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 27(5), 353-362..
PART B 135 Yates, C. J., Norton, D. A., & Hobbs, R. J. (2000). Grazing effects on plant cover, soil and microclimate in fragmented woodlands in south-western Australia: implications for restoration. Austral Ecology, 25(1), 36-47. Zerger, A., McIntyre, S., Gobbett, D., & Stol, J. (2011). Remote detection of grassland nutrient status for assessing ground layer vegetation condition and restoration potential of eucalypt grassy woodlands. Landscape and Urban Planning, 102(4), 226-233..
A i ‘1 Btokey's Rea Gum ~ Yetow Box a grassy woodiond (9) THI Vetow Be + Apple Bo al grassy woodian 4178) II secondary naive grasslands 0 35 7 14 Kilometers — Main Ross.
HISTORY OF THE JUSTICE ROBERT HOPE PARK and the Watson Woodlands Working Group The history of the Watson Community Association (WCA) and its activities goes back to 1989. The Watson Woodlands Working Group is comprised of WCA members. There is a coordinator who sets times for working bees; and liaises with ACT Government agencies, which provide insurance for the group, assistance in kind, and provides grants as appropriate..
Martin Grace Coordinator of the Watson Woodlands Working Group 2001 to 2008 You will be remembered • The WCA prepared its first National Landcare Program grant application in 1993. This does not appear to have been officially submitted. The document which I have in my possession is undated and clearly a handwritten draft. External funding sought was for the sum of $7400. The purpose of the grant application was to protect and manage native grassland, and to increase community awareness, knowledge and appreciation of native grassland communities. • The Watson Community Association was formally incorporated on November 17 1995. • Liberal Planning Minister Humphries defers development of Watson Woodlands ‘for the foreseeable future’ in September 1995. • ‘Walk for Watson Woodlands’ Picnic Rally April 2000 triggered by the announcement of funding for housing development in 2001-02 ACT Budget. • The Gilles Report on the Ecological Value of the Watson Woodlands is published June 2000. • ‘Keep the Bush in the Bush Capital’ Rally March 2001. Over 200 people hear leading national conservationist Phillip Toyne speak on the value of the Watson Woodlands..
Rally March 2001 • ALP declares support for protecting Watson Woodlands and an appropriate buffer zone May 2001. • Humphries Liberal Government forced by Greens, ALP and Independents to review Watson Woodlands housing development proposal June 2001. • Justice Robert Hope Park (Blocks 2 and 3, Section 75, Watson), comprising about 5ha of land, was named in September 3 2001, using Disallowable Instrument DI2001-275. A commemoration ceremony was held on Sept 13 2001 at the southern end of the Stirling Avenue reserve in Watson. • Commencement of on-ground work was recorded on September 1 2002. Martin Grace and John Briggs signed on. • The first volunteers working bee was held on September 29 2002. This attracted 36 adults and four children. Jean Gerre has provided photographs of this event. • There apparently was a grant application issued in 2001/02 for funding of $2934 to prepare a brochure and issue planning studies using consultants. • A second grant application in 2003/2004 for external funding of $4356 was primarily expended on on-ground work on the reserve and to finalise the draft Management Plan for North Watson Woodlands. The Site Assessment and Agreed Works Plan was finalized in November 2006. This grant was formally acquitted on January 30 2007..
• The Justice Robert Hope Park was expanded on August 2 2005 to include all of Section 72 Watson (approximately 18ha). The original Disallowable Instrument used to name and gazette the park, DI2001-275, was revoked, and replaced by DI2005-170. An open day to commemorate the Park, held on November 13 2005, was attended by June Hope and 101 participants signed on. Expanded Justice Robert Hope Park Commemoration November 13 2005 • A third grant application was submitted in 2006/07 for external funding of $8370. The budgeted work program for this grant has been primarily used to fence the gazetted boundary of the Park, for seed collection, plant propagation, planting of eucalypts, wattles and forbs, suppression of herbaceous weeds, and preparation for a native grass rejuvenation project (including purchase of additional fencing materials and Themeda – mixed grass hay). We intend to acquit this grant after June 30 2008. A revised budget and work plan was amended and approved on May 21 2008 to reflect the grass rejuvenation project, which is a very recent initiative of the working group. AIMS OF THE WATSON WOODLANDS WORKING GROUP Justice Robert Hope Park is a remnant Yellow Box/Red Gum Grassy Woodland, bounded by Stirling Avenue Reserve, Antill Street and Negus Crescent in the North Canberra suburb of Watson. The Watson Woodlands Working Group.
undertakes a number of activities in the Park including removal of non-native plant species, collecting seeds of local native plants, raising seedlings, re- vegetation using tube stock and flora and fauna monitoring. Activities and progress carried out by the group are published in the quarterly newsletter of the Watson Community Association, the Watzon. The WCA has published a brochure for the Watson Woodland ‘A Rare Patch’, and issued two significant documents to support its longer term work program and strategy. Three Parkcare grants have been successfully applied for since 2000/2001, with total external funding of some $15,660 allocated. We intend to expend the last of our grant monies by the end of financial year 2008. Working bees involving massed volunteers are seasonal-dependent and have traditionally not been held on a monthly or regular basis. Planting invariably occurs spring to early summer, progresses to late summer watering, summer weeding, autumn watering, and finally ends with winter preparation. Majura Primary School Grade 3 students Watering and mulching tree seedlings October 12 2007.
WORKING BEES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007-2008 Date Group Hours Number of volunteers Recorded volunteer hours July 19 2007 Conservation Volunteers Australia 23.00 17 Aug 12 2007 Watson Woodlands Working Group 25.25 9 Oct 12 2007 Majura Primary School (Year 3 students) 96.25 40 + 6 adults Oct 20 2007 Watson Woodlands Working Group 5.75 2 Nov 19 2007 Watson Woodlands Working Group 22.5 9 Mar 16 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 13.25 7 Mar 23 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 3.00 2 May 9-10 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 2.5 1 May 14 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 2.5 1 May 16 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 0.5 1 May 18 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 1.5 1 May 24-26 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 7.0 1 May 28-30 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 11.0 1 June 1-2 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 4.0 1 June 6-7 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 5.0 1 June 8-9 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 3.5 1 June 10 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 1.0 1 June 12 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 1.5 1 June 13 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 3.5 1 June 14 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 5.5 1 June 15 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 3.0 1 June 16 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 2.0 1 June 17 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 1.0 1 June 21 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 4.0 1 June 24 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 2.0 1 June 26 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 4.0 1 June 27 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 5.0 1 June 29 2008 Watson Woodlands Working Group 1.5 1 Total hours 260.5 July 1 2007 – June 30 2008 Estimate of unrecorded volunteer activity Scything weeds Watson Woodlands Working Group 14.00 1 Watering Watson Woodlands Working Group 24.00 1 or 2.
Tree and scrub planting Watson Woodlands Working Group 12.00 1 Auguring for trees Watson Woodlands Working Group 30.00 1 Preparation for tree planting Watson Woodlands Working Group 20.00 1 Wire cutting Watson Woodlands Working Group 15.00 1 Total hours 115.0 Richard Larson Chair, Watson Community Association Coordinator, Watson Woodlands Working Group Last updated June 26 2008.
= = = o = € O = o = o o o = b) C g iEE' =FEEEE iEEEE, $EE :F F 1 iE i ia g + i EiE?E ilt1E g$FE iF isgc=- iBgiji 1El1;Ezr;.Er?:Etz?ti =*iS = Sssg 3-=i = ia:aE E,,E1;1E"8??i! R* $ SB r * E i -* E*+:; i=.+ ==i ;; ieE trL CD C? s, trL CD o ? I o E J CD =o o trL U' N l: tJ e, a o C, ({\ C, q l.' { l.\ 0 t" -t s) - CD -r J g) ct II t+ s) i+ C) CD (D tr' - S) i+ (D CL :E :\< :< ia :O) i= i i air ag;giEii* ;# iu IaiaFEaiE$-; i+i irgelE! -F;: i;:;ia;ii_i>rE E; V=?= ziiilz-; z'ii = + ="i:; iE;=a:raI+;iIi:E:E [;a1 +1+-;it5Ei::i a;q; giri?,i1|ili =a = =, ==- i2 7F,-,, i ? ;, = = Z* ;z ;i ='= l=. e?e- 3 =iE =iiE i,zi;iuuaf ;; g ii = e;14-7; ;*?: E;[ = = rS==i]l ava=7 ;1i [;E i?A ;i=, = -_:3; s;F ra s a +* =i € +taf a;? ifra ; i u e*+i +; ic.
$ ; ==i_,;; E == =Do) =++ -AA doo o € 8= 'f 6 =O- Ep, -l =.d <(, rE OI o- 6_ =. 6'= -(D 1d J. ob- o3 Ed J -G) o: oo =o E6 +- 9o sq o qS o= 9=' o o6 op S3- go ils oo fS og) sE oJ - o-o E5; Q cri5 tr -O o o5 E=P. rO' E*q.
CHRONICLE joy Ktiy ZOlD.
In a life threatening emergency dial Triple Zero (000) triple zero 000 Canberra Hospital 5124 0000 North Canberra Hospital 6201 6111 Call Mental Health Triage on 1800 629 354 (free call except from mobiles or public phones) or 6205 1065 For a poison emergency in Australia call 13 11 26 The Drug and Alcohol Help Line is available 24-hours, 7 days a week on 5124 9977 For after hours urgent public health matters including environmental health, radiation safety, food poisoning and communicable disease management phone: (02) 6205 1700 24 hour health advice 1800 022 222 Emergency help during flood or storms 13 25 00 Justice Robert Hope Park Part of Canberra Nature Park in north-eastern Canberra Justice Robert Hope Park Nature Reserve is a 19-hectare, low-lying woodland protected area located in north-eastern Canberra, across the road from the Mount Majura Nature Reserve. The reserve is named after Justice Robert Marsden Hope AC CMG QC (1919–1999), a barrister, judge, royal commissioner and the first Chairman of the Heritage Council of NSW. Justice Hope's Committee of Inquiry into the National Estate led to acknowledgment of the concept of a National Estate and its protection as part of our heritage. Justice Robert Hope Park is on the lower western slopes of Mount Majura and is relatively flat with scattered mature trees and a grassy understorey. The reserve is part of an extensive area of forest and woodland in the northern ACT providing important wildlife habitat and a wildlife movement corridor linking through to the Majura Valley, the Molonglo River and into NSW. Bicycles including mountain bikes are not permitted in this reserve. Dogs are permitted on-leash on a track or trail only. Natural values Justice Robert Hope Park protects: Watson Woodlands Working Group (a member of Watson Community Association) helps protect the area and undertakes volunteer environmental activities in the nature reserve. Justice Robert Hope Park is protected under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Thank you for taking care of the natural environment. Add a sighting to the NatureMapr or visit the Canberra Birds website. Things to do Activities Features Restricted or prohibited Ngunnawal Country and People Justice Robert Hope Park is located on Ngunnawal Country, an ancient and diverse landscape managed and cared for by Ngunnawal people for tens of thousands of years. For time immemorial Ngunnawal people have maintained a tangible and intangible cultural, social, environmental, spiritual, and economic connection to these lands and waters. It is likely that unrecorded Aboriginal heritage sites exist in the reserve. All Aboriginal places and objects in the ACT are protected under the Heritage Act 2004 and must not be disturbed. Aboriginal places and objects within reserves are additionally protected under the Nature Conservation Act 2014. Anyone finding an (unregistered) Aboriginal object or place has an obligation to report it to the Heritage Council. European heritage In the early 1800s, the area was managed by George Campbell, who owned 'Duntroon', one of the region's major 19th century holdings. The land was later acquired by Archibald McKeahnie, who resided at 'Well Station', about 3 km to the north, until it was resumed by the Commonwealth in 1915. Justice Robert Hope Park was protected as a nature reserve in 2016 as part of an environmental offset. Before you go Prepare by understanding safety and checking alerts. Respect Canberra Nature Park reserves by: Remember: How to get there Justice Robert Hope Park is accessible from Antill Street in Watson. The reserve is called 'Watson Woodlands' on some maps. More information If you notice any issues during your visit: Find out about: Contact us for more information. Acknowledgement of Country We acknowledge the Ngunnawal people as traditional custodians of the ACT and recognise any other people or families with connection to the lands of the ACT and region. We acknowledge and respect their continuing culture and the contribution they make to the life of this city and this region..
Justice Robert Hope Park Offset Area Menu Associated Development: Residential Development, Block 9 Section 64 Watson and extension of Negus Crescent Commonwealth approval: EPBC 2012/6418 Length of approval: 30 November 2033. Following this date, the offset area will be incorporated into the Canberra Nature Park. Alternative name: Watson Woodlands Associated Nature Reserve: Justice Robert Hope Park Where is Justice Robert Hope Park Offset Area? Justice Robert Hope Park (Watson Woodlands - 18 Ha) is in the northern section of the suburb of Watson, at the western base of Mount Majura. The offset area connects to Mount Majura Nature Reserve on the eastern side through partially cleared land. Why is it an offset? Justice Robert Hope Park Offset Area has conservation objectives concerning Matters of National Environmental Significance (MNES), protected under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). Specifically: Other MNES present on the site include: What else is special about the Justice Robert Hope Park Offset Area? Connectivity Justice Robert Hope Park is on the lower slopes of Mount Majura Nature Reserve. The reserve forms a small part of a large woodland ridge system that stretches from the hills in Gungahlin, Mulligans Flat Nature Reserve and Goorooyarroo Nature Reserve , through to the Majura valley, supporting wildlife movement through this area. Threatened fauna Threatened flora Find out about threatened flora and fauna in our action plans and fact sheets. You can also find useful information through the NSW Government threatened biodiversity profile search and PlantNET. Ngunnawal Country and People Justice Robert Hope Park Offset Area is located on Ngunnawal Country, an ancient and diverse landscape managed by Ngunnawal people for tens of thousands of years. For time immemorial Ngunnawal people have maintained a tangible and intangible cultural, social, environmental, spiritual, and economic connection to these lands and waters. The Heritage Act 2004 makes particular provision for recognising, registering and conserving Aboriginal places and objects. Under the Act it is an offence to damage, disturb or destroy any Aboriginal place or object. Find out more about registration and protection of Aboriginal places and objects at: European heritage Post European settlement, the surrounding land was used for agriculture, particularly grazing of livestock. The offset site was a rural lease until 2001. Learn more about heritage. What can I do in this reserve? Pedestrian access points have been established in the fence line around Justice Robert Hope Park. Dogs are permitted on a leash. Management The long term management aim for the offset area is to protect and manage the Box-Gum Grassy Woodland community and habitat for woodland birds including the Regent Honeyeater (Anthochaera phrygia). Monitoring and research reports Find out more about monitoring and research in ACT Environmental Offsets. More information Find associated publications on the Offsets Register. We acknowledge the Ngunnawal people as traditional custodians of the ACT and recognise any other people or families with connection to the lands of the ACT and region. We acknowledge and respect their continuing culture and the contribution they make to the life of this city and this region..
ACT Greens act to protect ACT endangered woodlands from development The ACT Greens are pleased to pass a resolution in the Assembly today that will improve protections for Canberra’s endangered woodlands and its biodiversity. 2020-02-20 The Greens are committed to protect our environment & everything that depends on it. The ACT Greens are pleased to pass a resolution in the Assembly today that will improve protections for Canberra’s endangered woodlands and its biodiversity. “This part of Watson Woodlands was not protected when Mt Majura and Mt Ainslie were gazetted as nature reserve,” ACT Greens Leader and Environment spokesperson Shane Rattenbury said today. “My motion now requires the Government to assess this part of Watson’s endangered Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland for rezoning and addition to Canberra Nature Park. The endangered woodlands are currently zoned to allow for leisure and accommodation. “This is not the place we want to see buildings like hotels springing up. We need to ensure that developments respect local communities and protect Canberra’s unique and precious environment. “Once these precious woodlands are gone, they’re gone for good. “Sadly, so much of the ACT’s woodlands has already been removed for development or other infrastructure. The Greens have acted today to protect more of what is left. The ACT’s Yellow-Box Blakely’s Red Gum Woodland is listed as a critically endangered ecological community and is especially valuable as it is home to a variety of rare and threatened species including vulnerable birds and lizards. “The protection of these precious woodlands is a step in the right direction.” The Government will report back to the Assembly on the rezoning in August this year. Authorised by James Cruz and Julie Randall, The ACT Greens, 2/18 Lonsdale St, Braddon ACT 2612 For media enquiries, please contact media@act.greens.org.au The Greens acknowledge the Traditional Owners of country throughout Australia and recognise their continuing connection to land, waters and culture. We acknowledge that these lands were stolen and sovereignty was never ceded. We pay our respects to Elders past, present and emerging.Find our Reconciliation Action Plan here..
